Thank you. Thank you all have much.

[Applause]

Thank you. Thank you all very much. Thank you so much. A very rowdy group. Thank you, my friends. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you so very much for being here. I love you all, too. Last night I congratulated Donald Trump and offered to work with him on behalf of our country.

I hope that he will be a successful president for all Americans. This is not the outcome we wanted or we worked so hard for, and I'm sorry we did not win this election for the values we share and the vision we hold for our country.

But I feel pride and gratitude for this wonderful campaign that we built together. This vast, diverse, creative, unruly, energized campaign. You represent the best of America, and being your candidate has been one of the greatest honors of my life.

I know how disappointed you feel, because I feel it too. And so do tens of millions of Americans who invested their hopes and dreams in this effort. This is painful, and it will be for a long time. But I want you to remember this.

Our campaign was never about one person, or even one election. It was about the country we love and building an America that is hopeful, inclusive, and big-hearted. We have seen that our nation is more deeply divided than we thought. But I still believe in America, and I always will. And if you do, then we must accept this result and then look to the future. Donald Trump is going to be our president. We owe him an open mind and the chance to lead. Our constitutional democracy enshrines the peaceful transfer of power.

We don't just respect that. We cherish it. It also enshrines the rule of law; the principle we are all equal in rights and dignity; freedom of worship and expression. We respect and cherish these values, too, and we must defend them.

[Applause]

Let me add: Our constitutional democracy demands our participation, not just every four years, but all the time. So let's do all we can to keep advancing the causes and values we all hold dear. Making our economy work for everyone, not just those at the top, protecting our country and protecting our planet.

And breaking down all the barriers that hold any American back from achieving their dreams. We spent a year and a half bringing together millions of people from every corner of our country to say with one voice that we believe that the American dream is big enough for everyone.

For people of all races, and religions, for men and women, for immigrants, for LGBT people, and people with disabilities. For everyone.

I am so grateful to stand with all of you. I want to thank Tim Kaine and Anne Holton for being our partners on this journey. [Cheers and applause]

It has been a joy get to go know them better and gives me great hope and comfort to know that Tim will remain on the front lines of our democracy representing Virginia in the Senate. [Cheers and applause]

To Barack and Michelle Obama, our country owes you an enormous debt of gratitude.

We thank you for your graceful, determined leadership that has meant so much to so many Americans and people across the world. And to Bill and Chelsea, Mark, Charlotte, Aidan, our brothers and our entire family, my love for you means more than I can ever express.

You crisscrossed this country, even 4-month-old Aidan, who traveled with his mom. I will always be grateful to the talented, dedicated men and women at our headquarters in Brooklyn and across our country.

You poured your hearts into this campaign. To some of you who are veterans, it was a campaign after you had done other campaigns. Some of you, it was your first campaign. I want each of you to know that you were the best campaign anybody could have ever expected or wanted.

And to the millions of volunteers, community leaders, activists and union organizers who knocked on doors, talked to their neighbors, posted on Facebook -- even in secret private Facebook sites.

I want everybody coming out from behind that and make sure your voices are heard going forward. [Cheers and applause]

To anyone that sent contributions, even as small as $5, that kept us going, thank you. To all of us, and to the young people in particular, I hope you will hear this -- I have, as Tim said, I have spent my entire life fighting for what I believe in.

I've had successes and setbacks and sometimes painful ones. Many of you are at the beginning of your professional, public, and political careers -- you will have successes and setbacks too.

This loss hurts, but please never stop believing that fighting for what's right is worth it.

It is, it is worth it. [Cheers and applause]

And so we need -- we need you to keep up these fights now and for the rest of your lives. And to all the women, and especially the young women, who put their faith in this campaign and in me: I want you to know that nothing has made me prouder than to be your champion.

Now, I know we have still not shattered that highest and hardest glass ceiling, but someday someone will -- and hopefully sooner than we might think right now. [Cheers and applause]

And to all of the little girls who are watching this, never doubt that you are valuable and powerful and deserving of every chance and opportunity in the world to pursue and achieve your own dreams. [Cheers and applause]

Finally, finally, I am so grateful for our country and for all it has given to me.

I count my blessings every single day that I am an American, and I still believe, as deeply as I ever have, that if we stand together and work together with respect for our differences, strengthen our convictions, and love for this nation, our best days are still ahead of us.

Because, you know, I believe we are stronger together and we will go forward together. And you should never, ever regret fighting for that. You know, scripture tells us, let us not grow weary of doing good, for in good season we shall reap. My friends, let us have faith in each other, let us not grow weary and lose heart, for there are more seasons to come and there is more work to do.

I am incredibly honored and grateful to have had this chance to represent all of you in this consequential election. May God bless you and may God bless the United States of America.

Hello, Dade City!

I am so excited about being here. Thank you, all for this really warm, wonderful welcome. And I thank, on behalf of all of us I want to thank Alicia Machado for that introduction and for sharing her story with us. Alicia will be voting for the very first time in this election, and I am very grateful for her support. I'm also delighted that we're joined today by your great senator Bill Nelson and his wife Grace.

I also want to thank Representative Amanda Hickman from the Florida State House, Michael Cox, chairman of the Greater Pasco Chamber of Commerce, Michael Ledbetter, who is the Pasco County Democratic executive committee chair and his wife Beverly. And thanks to retired Colonel Wilson Elton [inaudible] for his pledge of allegiance. And thanks to all the elected officials here. And I especially want to thank all of you for not just joining us but helping us to get out the vote in this last week!

It's almost hard to believe, isn't it? There are only seven days left in this election.

So are you ready to vote?

Are you ready to volunteer these last seven days?

I hope too that you ready to elect Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate! Patrick, who's been in Congress, will be an independent voice for Florida families. And I am so excited to think about what he could do, because unlike his opponent, he's never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump.

Now somebody asked me the other day, "Why do you keep coming back to Florida?' Just look around folks. I mean it is a beautiful, and I have lots of friends, but it's also really important in this election. Florida can decide who our next president is, which will affect the nation and the world. And I want to make sure that every voter in Florida spends these next seven days thinking about what's at stake in this election. Because honestly I believe this may be the most important election of our lifetimes.

One week from today, we will be choosing our next president and commander-in-chief of the United States. I don't think the choice could be any clearer. I have spent my career fighting for children and families. I have served in the United States Senate, served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. I was in the Situation Room when we brought Osama Bin Laden to justice. I represented you as your secretary of state, going to 112 countries, negotiating with friend and foe alike. I am ready to serve if you give me the great honor of being your president.

Now, I do have to say that I think that stands in contrast to my opponent. And maybe for you if you think about all of the issues that separate Donald Trump from me, it could be his dangerous statements about nuclear weapons.

When a journalist told Donald Trump that people were worried about how casually he talks about using nuclear weapons, he said, "Well then why are we making them?'

And I have to tell you yesterday I was in Ohio, and I was introduced by a gentleman who was one of our officers in charge of launching nuclear weapons if the order ever came from our president. And what he told the crowd -- it was a big crowd at Kent State University -- I think every voter should hear. Basically -- his name was Bruce Blair -- he said that, having had the responsibility of sitting in a bunker, being responsible for the codes and the keys to our nuclear weapons, he knows that when a president makes the order to launch a nuclear attack, there is no appeal. There is no veto. And that is why he has joined with dozens of former Air Force officers to send a letter to say, "We need a president with the temperament, the steadiness, the calmness to be in charge of nuclear weapons.' And therefore they cannot support Donald Trump, because he does not have the temperament to be our commander-in-chief and handle those responsibilities.

So when you think about voting, early this week, voting next Tuesday, responsibility for our nuclear weapons is on the ballot.

So is immigration. Do we want to round up millions of people who are here working, raising their families, as he has suggested he will do? I don't think so. I think what we want is to bring them out of the shadows so that they can't be exploited by employers like Donald Trump, who refused to hire Americans and hired undocumented workers so he could pay them less. I don't think that's right.

Now maybe for some of you, what Donald Trump said about prisoners of war will be enough reason to vote against him, somebody who questioned the patriotism and the service of John McCain because he was a prison of war. We need a Commander in Chief who respects the service and sacrifice of the men and women who wear our uniform.

Or maybe for some of you, it's what he said about a judge born in Indiana, who just happened to be assigned the case brought by people who were defrauded by the phony Trump University. And so Trump said, "Well, we can't trust him because his parents were born in Mexico.' Now Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House, called -- well, but wait a minute, -- he called what Trump said about that distinguished federal judge, "The definition of a racist comment.'

And then Trump went on to attack a Gold Star family whose son, Captain Khan, died defending our country, simply because that family was Muslim.

And then let's not forget, Trump spent years, years insisting that President Obama was not born in the United States, even after the birth certificate was produced. Honestly if this were something new, I think we'd all be asking ourselves, "Well, what does he have against President Obama?' Or what does he have against me? But this is not new. I know I'm reaching out to Republicans and Independents as well as Democrats because I want to be the president for all Americans.

And here's what I want you to tell. I want you to tell your Republican friends, in 1987 Donald Trump took out a Donald Trump took out a $100,000 ad in the New York Times to criticize President Reagan. He said, "Our leaders are the laughing stock of the world.' So this is a man who thinks that he is better than President Reagan, better than President Obama -- literally better than anybody, I guess. And, when you think about it, what he said at the convention, "I alone can fix it,' runs counter to who we are as Americans. We work together.

So there are many reasons why I think it is fair to conclude that Donald Trump is unqualified and unfit to be president. But today, I want to just spend a few minutes focusing in particular about what he has said and what he has done to woman and girls because -- Any of you see the debates? I stood next to Donald for four and a half hours during those three debates, proving conclusively I have the stamina to be President of the United States. And during those debates, Donald always used to say, "What have you been doing for 30 years?' And I always found that kind of odd, because he could Google it and find out. And so I've been a lawyer, and I've been a first lady, and I've been a senator, and I've been Secretary of State, and I've been a wife and a mother and a grandmother and a friend and a churchgoer, and for my entire life I've been a woman.

And when I think about what we now know about Donald Trump and what he's been doing for 30 years, he sure has spent a lot of time demeaning, degrading, insulting, and assaulting women. And, I've got to tell you, some of what we've learned -- some of this stuff is very upsetting. I would, frankly, rather be here talking about nearly anything else, like how we're going to create good jobs and get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. How we're going to make college affordable for every single family, because I have a plan that if your family makes less than $125,000, you will not pay tuition to go to a state college or university. And if you're above that, it will be debt free, and we will help you pay back the debt you already have so you can get out from under it.

But I can't just talk about all of the good things we want to do, because people are making up their minds. This is a consequential choice, so we've got to talk about something that, frankly, is painful, because it matters. We can't just wish it away. And a lot of his supporters don't like to hear this. I don't blame them. If I were supporting him, I wouldn't want to hear it either, to be honest. But I've got to tell you, I learned way back in elementary school and I learned it in Sunday school: it's not okay to insult people. It's not okay.

And look at what he does. He calls women "ugly,' "disgusting,' "nasty' all the time. He calls women "pigs,' rates bodies on a scale from 1 to 10. We just heard from Alicia. She was Miss Universe when Donald Trump owned the pageant. Well, he said she put on some weight and it made him angry, so he called her "Miss Piggy.' He called her "Miss Housekeeping' because she's a beautiful Latina. He brought a bunch of reporters to a gym to watch him order her around to exercise. Now, he also said, "This is somebody who likes to eat.' Well, I have to say: who doesn't like to eat? I mean, really, can we just stop for a minute and reflect on the absurdity of Donald Trump finding fault with Miss Universe?

But you've got to ask: why does he do these things? Who acts like this? And, I'll tell you who: a bully, that's who. And thankfully, Alicia refuses to let such a small person get her down. She knows that Donald Trump doesn't get to decide her value in her eyes and in the eyes of her family and her friends.

But what about our girls? What about girls watching all this? What happens to their confidence, their sense of self-worth? If you've got a daughter, a granddaughter, a sister, a mother, a wife, a good friend, someone like this becoming president who insults more than half the population of the United States of America? And what about our boys? This is not someone we want them looking up to.

Not so long ago, I was the mother of a teenage girl. And every day I tried to make sure that she knew she was smart and she was capable, and I'm doing the same thing with my granddaughter and my grandson. Because, let's be honest here, the world has a way of telling our girls exactly the opposite -- they don't look right, they're not thin enough, they don't act right, no one will like them unless they change their clothes or straighten their hair or stop being bossy, or whatever the criticism might be. Right?

And I remember, when Chelsea was a teenager, I would wait on the second floor of the White House in the long hall that's there for her to come home from school. And sometimes, we only had a few minutes together. But before she'd run off to talk to her friends or do whatever she was planning to, I would figure out how was the day. We'd talk about what was on her mind. And that time together was really valuable to me as a parent, because we parents, and I know there are a lot of parents here today, we work hard to give our kids a sense of confidence to send them out into the world believing in their own value, and it really is important that we don't let anybody take that away from them. And we want them to be strong, and we don't want them to feel bad about themselves. And we've got to work hard to make sure our boys, just like our girls, have that same sense of positive energy: not negative, not tearing people down -- lifting people up and respecting women.

In fact, all of us should respect each other in our country. So, when I look at my granddaughter and my grandson, I am on the same mission. I want them to know they're love, they're cared for, they're respected. I want them to develop a good work ethic. I believe in hard work, and I want them to go out and prove themselves in the world. But that's what I want for every child. I have spent my life doing everything I could to help kids and families. It will be the mission of my presidency. I will get up every day in the White House trying to figure out: how can we knock down the barriers, overcome the challenges so that people living here in Pasco County can get ahead and stay ahead?

So I know there's work to be done. We can't do it with just words alone. We've got to do more to stop treatment about women being somehow objectified. And, oh my gosh, when we heard that tape and we heard what he does to women. I'm not going to repeat it. But you know what Donald Trump was bragging about: grabbing women, mistreating women. And I have to tell you, since that tape came out, twelve women have come [inaudible] "What he said on that tape is what he did to me.'

And then we heard his response. What he does at his rallies is to go after those women all over again, insulting them. He said he couldn't possibly have said those things because the women weren't attractive enough to assault. "Look at her,' he said about one woman. "I don't think so.' About another, he said, "She wouldn't be my first choice.'

He's also on tape bragging with the radio personality Howard Stern about how he used to go backstage at beauty pageants to barge in on the women while they were getting dressed. He said he did that -- he said he did that to "inspect' them. That was his word -- and he said, "I sort of get away with things like that.' And sure enough, contestants have come forward to say, "Yes, that's exactly what he did to us.' Now, as bad as that is, he didn't just do it at the Miss USA pageant or the Miss Universe pageant. He's also been accused of doing it at the Miss Teen USA pageant. Contestants say that Donald Trump came in to look at them when they were changing. Some of them were just 15 years old.

We cannot hide from this. We've got to be willing to face it. This man wants to be president of the United States of America and our First Lady, Michelle Obama, spoke for many of us when she said Donald Trump's words have shaken her to her core.

For a lot of women who have gone through something like this in your lives, that's brought back painful memories. And for men who would never, ever talk or act like Donald, it's been shocking to see this. He tried to explain it away as "locker room talk,' well, I'll tell you what, a lot of professional athletes stood up and said, "Not in our locker rooms. That does not happen.'

Well, I guess the bottom line is he thinks belittling women makes him a bigger man.

And I don't think there's a woman anywhere who doesn't know what that feels like.

He doesn't look at us and see full human beings, with our dreams and purposes, our own capabilities. And he has shown us that clearly throughout this campaign.

Well, he's very wrong. He is wrong about both the women and the men of this country. He has shown us who he is. Let us on Tuesday show him who we are. We can stand up for what we believe, what we want for our children and grandchildren, what we know is right. And you can go down the list of everything he has said. He doesn't believe in equal pay, he thinks pregnancy is an inconvenience, he won't raise the minimum wage, and he said if he comes home and dinner is not on the table, he gets angry. Instead of supporting women who are out there supporting their families, he wants to make it even harder.

Well, I have a message for him. We're going to fight for affordable childcare. We're going to fight for equal pay for all people. We're going to fight for paid family leave, we're going to fight to make sure everybody gets raising wages in America and that's important because so many people still struggling, still working hard, raising a family, having a hard time getting all of their bills paid. And that's especially true for minimum wage workers -- who -- two-thirds of whom are women, so we've got work to do my friends. I'm excited because I know we can do this and I will stand up and I will fight for you, I will work for you, I will give my heart to this mission of making our country all it should be. Because instead of Donald Trump's dangerous and divisive vision, mine is positive, optimistic, hopeful and unifying.

But I can't do any of this without your help. Early voting has already begun. Almost 26 millions Americans have already voted and that includes four million right here in Florida. Americans are voting for the kind of better future we can make together. And voting on all the issues that they care about. It may be my name and Donald's name on the ballot but everything you care about, our security, our economy, bringing our country together, the environment, clean water and clean air!

Here in Dade City, you can vote every day from now until November 5th, from 7am to 7pm.

In fact, right now, the East Pasco Government Center is just a few minutes' drive away. You can go there right after this rally and vote. Because, we need everybody to stand up in this election.

And if you have a mail-in ballot at home, send it in when you get home today.

Don't wait to send it back! Talk friends and family and neighbors and co-workers.

Donald Trump's strategy is pretty simple-- he said he wants to suppress young people from voting women from voting, people of color from voting, that is a lot of people. By showing up with the biggest turnout ever we will show him and everybody a message that that is not who we are.

Now I know here in this county and this larger region, you probably know some people who are going to vote for Trump. And here is what I want to ask you, I want you to talk with them. Ask them what they care about. Ask them what kind of future they want for their economy. Because Donald Trump's economic plan is slashing taxes on the wealthy and big corporations. I have said that I want the wealthy to pay their fair share and I will not raise taxes on anybody making less than $250,000 a year.

So there could not be, no matter what you care about, a bigger difference between me and Donald Trump, and I hope that you will come out and volunteer for these last seven days.

We are signing up for volunteer shifts making calls, knocking on doors, it really matters, turn out matters.

Please go to hillaryclinton.com to see how you can get involved. Here is what I want to leave you with. You know, I feel like so many of you, our country is already great but we can make is greater. The main reason America is great is because America is good. We are a big hearted, generous people. Not a small minded people. We know that if everybody works together we will get farther together than if we separate people, we push them down, we engage in all the negativity that we have heard too much in this campaign. But sometimes, the fate of even the greatest nations lie in the balance. For America, this is one of those make or break elections. It really is in your hands.

I hope you will think about how you will feel the day after the election on November 9th. are we going to more forward together or are we going to move backwards by someone who wants to bully us? And I hope, I hope you will think about how together we can make a difference, I want to be your partner as well as your president, I want us to create the best possible future for our children and our grandchildren. That is what I will work my heart out to do and I hope you will help me to make a better, fairer, stronger America. Where we prove once and for all that love trumps hate!

Thank you all.

Thank you so much! Wow, it is great to be back in Cincinnati. What a beautiful night on the banks of this magnificent river. I am grateful to all of you. I am thrilled to be here with my dear friends Mark and Gabby, and with all of you, because there are just eight days left in what is the most important election of our lifetimes.

Are you ready to work hard in this election and win it? Are you ready to send Ted Strickland to the United States Senate? I've known Ted a long time. He is a champion for workers and families. He knows that Ohio needs more good jobs with rising wages. And he is the kind of person who will actually work to get things done, breaking through the gridlock in Washington. And this is important: unlike his opponent, Ted Strickland has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump.

I also want to thank Mayor John Cranley and State Representative Alicia Reece and all the other elected officials, including my friend, the Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, from across the river in Kentucky. And we are so fortunate to have two other champions for American families with us today. I am awed by the courage and commitment that both Mark and Gabby bring to their work, to do everything they can to help save lives in America.

You know, as Gabby says every day when she goes out, fight, fight, fight. And fight she does. She fights to make sure that we save lives and we prevent injuries and we do it together -- to end the epidemic of gun violence that threatens our children, our fellow men and women, our country. And Gabby and Mark know something very important: there is a big majority of Americans, including a majority of gun owners, to stand behind and achieve commonsense gun safety measures. And I am looking forward to working with them as their partner.

You know, you go through life, you go through the campaigns, there are ups and there are downs. And my mother, who had a really difficult life, she told me something that has stayed with me and certainly has come in handy in this campaign. Everybody gets knocked down; what matters is whether you get back up. And throughout this campaign, I have stayed focused on one thing: you -- your lives, your families, the problems that keep you up at night. Because that's really what this election is all about. It's not about the noise and the distractions. It's about what kind of country we want for our kids, and what kind of president can help get us there.

I have so much that I want to do with you on behalf of Cincinnati and Ohio and America. And whether or not I get the chance to serve you really depends upon what happens in this election.

Now, earlier today, I was up at Kent State, a great university, and I told them about some of the reasons why I think it's really important to get everybody out to vote in this election. But I started by saying that there's this new email story about -- why in the world the FBI would decide to jump into an election without evidence of any wrongdoing with just days to go. That's a really good question. But I want you to know -- look, I've said repeatedly I made a mistake, I'm not making any excuses, but I will tell you this. If they want to look at some more emails of one of my staffers, by all means, go ahead, look at them. And I know they will reach the same conclusion they reached when they looked at my emails last year, right? It wasn't even a close call, and I think most people have moved on. They're looking and focused on, okay, who is going to be the next president and commander-in-chief?

Did any of you see the debates? Any of you see the debates? Well, I am -- I got a little bit of a chance. I did stand there for four and a half hours with Donald Trump, proving conclusively I have the stamina to do the job. But I did occasionally get a chance to ask people to take a look at my 30 years of public service, my plans for our country, what Tim Kaine and I have said we want to do, and then weigh that against my opponent, what he's done and said. I am running against someone who says he doesn't understand why we can't use nuclear weapons. He actually said, "Then why are we making them?" He wants more countries to have nuclear weapons. He's mentioned Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia. Now, if you are hoping that he might surround himself with good people who would stop his crazy ideas, remember this. When he was asked who he consults with on foreign policy, Donald Trump said he didn't need to consult because, and I quote, "I have a very good brain." He said he knows more about ISIS than our generals do. [Booing.] No, Donald, you don't. And of course, the people that Donald Trump has around him include two men whose activities are also reportedly being investigated because of their ties to Russia, Vladimir Putin, and their allies.

So in these last days, let's not get distracted from the real choice in this election. Donald Trump has proven himself to be temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief.

I have to tell you, it does not give me any pleasure saying that. It's not a small thing. I have watched and known a lot of the people who have run for president, both Republicans and Democrats. And look, I've had my disagreements with Republicans. I might have disagreed on policies or principles, but I never doubted their fitness to serve in this office. Donald Trump is different, and that's why there is so much at stake in this election. He has a dark and divisive vision for America that could tear our country apart. Abraham Lincoln understood a house divided against itself cannot stand, and that was over the greatest of challenges -- the challenge posed by slavery -- and we fought a civil war. But we also have to take stock of how divided we are today, the kinds of divisions that need to be healed to bring people together.

I will tell you this. I want to bring not just Democrats, but Republicans and Independents, people who vote for me and people who vote against me, together. Because I have a very different vision of America. Instead of dark and divisive, it's hopeful and inclusive. It's big-hearted, not small-minded. It is about lifting people up, not putting them down. It's a vision that says, and I believe this with all my heart, we are stronger together. And America is great because America is good. Never forget that. Yes, we have our flaws; of course, we're only humans. But what we have done over the course of our history to keep widening the circle of opportunity and equality and freedom is unlike any other place in the history of the world. So we want an America where women are respected -- where our veterans are honored -- where parents and families are supported and workers are paid fairly. And we believe in an America where marriage is a right, and discrimination is wrong. An America that leads in the world and lives up to our values, where everyone counts, everyone has a place, and the American dream is big enough for everybody. So the choice could not be clearer and the stakes could not be higher.

When I was at Kent State talking about the threats that Donald Trump poses to our national security, I was really struck. It was a very big crowd, and it was primarily students. And I thought to myself, well, I'm not going to give a rah-rah speech because I really want to talk about what this means to national security. And I was introduced by a gentleman named Bruce Blair, a former Air Force officer in charge of the nuclear codes and keys. A launch officer. And he came out for me, along with now more than 30 launch officers, and basically they said, we cannot support Donald Trump because he should never, ever be near the nuclear codes and keys.

And even the prospect of an actual nuclear war doesn't seem to bother him. "Good luck. Enjoy yourselves, folks," is what he had to say about a potential nuclear conflict in Asia. I wonder if he even knows that a single -- a single -- nuclear warhead can kill millions of people? That is why dozens of retired nuclear launch officers took the unprecedented step of saying that Donald should, and I quote, "not have his finger on the button." And when it comes to handling a crisis, we've seen in this campaign that Donald Trump loses his cool at the slightest provocation -- when he's gotten a tough question from a reporter, or when he's challenged in a debate, or when he sees a protestor at a rally, when he's confronted by his own words. So imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis. [Cries of "No!"] Imagine him plunging us into a war because somebody got under his very thin skin. I hope you'll think about that when you cast your vote in this election. Think about what it takes to lead in a very complicated world, and in whose hands you want to put the safety of our children and grandchildren.

And think about the difference between electing a president who will do nothing and president who will tackle the epidemic of gun violence in America. As Gabby knows so well, 33,000 Americans a year are killed guns. Thousands more are injured. It's an average of 90 people a day dying. Here in Ohio more people are killed by guns than die in car crashes. We have seen moviegoers gunned down in theaters, little children killed in their classrooms, clubgoers massacred in Orlando, nine faithful people murdered at Bible study in Charleston, South Carolina. And we've seen far too many young African American men and women killed by gun violence, which is now the leading cause of death for young black men. And when we think about that, we think of Dontre Hamilton or Jordan Davis or Trayvon Martin and others. I've had the great honor of getting to know their mothers, who have turned their grief into action and their mourning into a movement.

But here's what I want to say. If anything else in our country were killing as many people, people of good faith, people who believe, like we do, in the Second Amendment, people who own guns, people who go hunting, people who are collectors, we would say, hey, wait a minute. This can't go on. We need comprehensive background checks to close the gun show loophole, close the online loophole. And we know here in Ohio a majority of gun owners support these common-sense steps to prevent gun violence because they know we can respect the Second Amendment and keep our kids and communities safe at the same time. And we need to keep guns out of the hands suspected terrorists. If you are too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun, period.

And look. There is a very clear difference. Donald Trump won't stand up to the gun lobby. He's sold out to them. In fact, the gun lobby is spending more on ads to get Donald Trump elected than any other group, more than $7 million in Ohio alone. And in return, Donald Trump has promised to repeat President Obama's actions to strengthen criminal background checks. Donald says guns should be allowed in nightclubs that serve alcohol. He's even said, on his very first day in office, he would require every school in America to let people carry guns into our classrooms. How can anyone think our schools would be safer with more guns?

So I have stood up to the gun lobby for years, which is why they are running all of these ads against me. And I will stand up to them as president. I will work with Gabby and Mark and Americans for Responsible Solutions to pass common sense reforms because we've got to keep guns out of the wrong hands and help save lives.

I will also get up every day in the White House working my heart out for you, whatever I can do to knock down barriers to empower people, to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. That's how I was raised. I was raised to believe that if you work hard -- and I believe in hard work -- you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead in America. And I will never ever quit on you. When I tell you I'm going to try to do something that will make a positive difference in your life, I don't care what the political or other barriers are. We're going to find a way over, under, around, or through until we get it done. I've been fighting for families and underdogs my entire life, and I'm not stopping now. Remember, when our opponents go low, we go high. We're not going to be distracted. We're not going to be knocked off course. We know how much this election matters. And everything all of you can do between now and the time that the polls close is going to really count.

Now, the Donald Trump campaign strategy is pretty simple. They've announced it. Their strategy is: get women to stay home, get young people to stay home, and get people of color to stay home. It's all part of his scorched-earth campaign, but it actually adds up to more than half of our whole population when you stop to think about it. And it goes against everything we stand for. So if you're as upset as I am by the campaign that he has run, the things he has said, insulting not just women but immigrants, Latinos, African Americans, prisoners of war, Muslims, veterans, the military -- I mean, the list goes on and on. It's almost impossible to understand how somebody could run for president who seems not to like America as much as he does.

So you know the best way to stop him: by showing up with the biggest turnout in history. We need more Americans to vote. And I think we have a chance to get more Americans from all walks of life to vote because we're already seeing record turnout. Twenty-three million people have already voted in this election. And more than one million of them are right here in Ohio. There is no doubt if we vote, we win. So, please, if you haven't voted early, please do so. And please get your friends and your family, everybody you know to vote. Take people to vote with you. Try to help those who might have a little problem getting there.

Make sure that everybody you know understands early voting has begun. And you can go to iwillvote.com to find your nearest early voting location because, make no mistake, whatever issue you care about -- I've only mentioned a few tonight, but whatever issue you care about is on the ballot. Now, it may be my name and my opponent's name, but where we stand on these issues, what we've done in the past, what we have said we want to do in the future, that is all on the ballot. The future of our economy is at stake, of our education system is at stake. Fighting climate change and clean, renewable-energy jobs are at stake. LGBT equality is at stake. Equal pay for women is at stake. Actually, in the end, the American dream itself is at stake. So I want you to think about how you will feel on November 9th. [AUDIENCE MEMBER -- "Happy."]

Happy. I think that's the right answer. But just suppose, just suppose you go to bed early. Suppose you go to bed early. Maybe you were too busy to vote or maybe you didn't make calls or knock on doors. I want you to imagine. So you get up early on the morning of the 9th. And you log on to the news to find out, hey, what's going on, or maybe you turn on the TV or the radio, and you hear. [AUDIENCE -- "No!"]

I want you to really understand what that means for you and for all of us because I prefer for us to be motivated by what we're for, not what we're against. But I also think it's prudent to imagine what could happen if we don't do our part. And when in the future somebody asks you, maybe your kids or your grandkids, "What did you do when everything was on the line?' I want you to be able to say, "I voted for a better, fairer, stronger America.'

Let's go out and, in these next eight days, do everything we can to make it clear we're going after the kind of future that includes everybody. We're going to build this economy: new jobs, rising wages. We're going to make college affordable and help you pay down your student debt. We are going to do what will give you the best chance for your own lives and the lives of our kids and our grandkids. So if we build that future together, we will be able to say we were part of making sure that America's best days are still ahead of us. And we will prove, once and for all, that love trumps hate.

Thank you all.

Hello, Miami Dade College! It is so great to be here with all of you.

And I want to thank everyone for gathering and in particular, I want to thank all of the elected officials. Thanks to Congressman Patrick Murphy who I hope is the next senator from Florida. Thanks to Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Thank you to Mayor Phillip Levine of Miami Beach. Thanks to Mayor Phillip Stoddard of South Miami. Thanks to all the others who were part of the program. As we were coming in, we heard lots of energy coming from this crowd, and I was told as I was coming out, there's an overflow, but they can hear us in the overflow, and we're so happy you're here as well! So thanks to the overflow crowd. But what I am most excited about is to be here with one of the world's most foremost leaders on climate change: Al Gore.

About a decade ago, Al made a movie called "An Inconvenient Truth.' Now, maybe some of you have seen it, but if you haven't, I hope you'll watch it tonight. It doesn't have a lot of special effects -- but it does have a lot of drama.

And here's the main message: climate change is real, it's urgent, and America can take the lead in the world in addressing it. Right? We here in America can develop new clean energy solutions. We can transform our economy. We can rally the world to cut carbon pollution. And above all, we can fulfill our moral obligation to protect our planet for our children and our grandchildren.

Now, let me just say -- so, so let's remember, let's remember what's at stake. I'm running against a guy who denies science, denies climate change, claims it's a hoax created by the Chinese. So this is something that Al Gore's been working on for a really long time. And I want you to know how far back he goes. It was in 1982 when he held the very first hearing on climate change in the House of Representatives with the world-famous climate scientist Jim Hansen. And then when Al became a senator, he continued to raise the alarm and look for solutions, and as vice president, he led America's efforts to negotiate the Kyoto Protocol to cut greenhouse gas emissions. You take all this together, those 30 years of leadership led Al Gore to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007.

I was very proud because he had been determined and persistent, and in the face of a lot of people -- in public life, in business, in elsewhere who were trying to diminish the importance of the science -- he never wavered. And in the years since, the climate challenge has only grown more stark. And I will tell you this, it is one of the most important issues at stake in this election.

Look at it this way. Our next president will either step up our efforts to address climate change, to protect our planet, to protect our health, and to create good jobs that cannot be outsourced by growing our clean energy economy. Or in the alternative, we will be dragged backwards and our whole future will be put at risk.

So we've really got to get this right. And if you need additional convincing, just remember what happened this week. Hurricane Matthew killed at least 26 people in our country, more than a thousand as far as we know right now in Haiti. North Carolina is still dealing with serious flooding and will be at least for the rest of the week, if not longer. We all need to support each other as our communities put the pieces back together and begin the long road back from this disaster.

That's why I've encouraged everyone to give what you can afford to the Florida Disaster Fund or to Team Rubicon, the veterans organization working to respond to Hurricane Matthew, or to UNICEF, helping children and families on the ground in Haiti.

Now, some will say, "We've always had hurricanes. They've always been destructive.' And that's true. But Hurricane Matthew was likely more destructive because of climate change. Right now, the ocean is at or near record-high temperatures -- and that contributed to the torrential rainfall and the flash flooding that we saw in the Carolinas. Sea levels have already risen about a foot -- one foot -- in much of the Southeast, which means that Matthew's storm surge was higher and the flooding was more severe.

Plus, as you know, the impact of climate change goes beyond extreme events like hurricanes. It's become a daily reality here in Miami. You have streets in Miami Beach and in Shorecrest that are flooding at high tide. The ocean is bubbling up through the sewer system. Sometimes, people call 311 because they assume a water main must have broken when actually it is the sea rising around them.

So, if you need proof that climate change is real and that it's costly, there you go. So at this rate, at this rate, my friends, my friends, please. Let's focus on what's really important in this election and in your future and the future of our country, because this is what I want you to hear and understand. At the rate we are going, one in eight homes in Florida could be underwater by the end of the century, and when kids -- like that adorable young boy over there on his dad's shoulders -- are grandparents, we believe that's more than $400 billion worth of property in Florida at risk, and nationwide, it's as much as $882 billion in property at risk.

But there's also health consequences. Mosquitoes that carry diseases like the Zika virus and ticks that carry Lyme disease are expanding their ranges. And hotter summers and longer pollen seasons are making allergies and asthma worse, which is especially bad for our children. And look at what is happening in California, a brutal five-year drought. Wildfires have burned more than 9 million acres in our country last year.

And it's also about national security. The Pentagon has identified climate change as a threat to our America's national security. The U.S. Atlantic Fleet is based in Norfolk, Virginia. It's the largest naval installation in the world. And because of rising sea level, the base is frequently flooded, even when it's sunny. So that's why the Pentagon is looking at how climate change will affect readiness and operations, not just in Norfolk, but at all of our military bases around the world.

So you would think if you look at the facts, if you listen to the science, that even the most committed climate skeptic would say, "Ok, I agree, something's happening here. We need to take it seriously.'

But unfortunately, there are still plenty of people -- in Washington, on the campaign trail -- who won't face what's happening right in front of us.

Donald Trump, is, quote, "not a big believer' in climate change. As I said, he said it's a hoax created by the Chinese. And in our first debate two weeks ago, he tried to deny saying that. But that tweet is still there for everyone to see.

And I would wish that Donald would actually listen to people here in Florida, like Miami Beach's Mayor Philip Levine and others who are doing incredible work to address these "Sunny Day' Floods. Or maybe, he would listen to Miami Beach Commissioner John Elizabeth Alemán. Or maybe he would listen to Miami Beach Commissioner, John Elizabeth Alemán. John Elizabeth is a Republican, but she's supporting our campaign--because she knows America can't afford a candidate who doesn't accept climate science. Or maybe Donald would listen to our military leaders who say climate change threatens our national security, or what about the ranchers in Colorado, or the mayors in Arizona or the community leaders in Alaska who say, "Our lives and jobs and families are being affected -- please, let's come together as a country and do something about it.'

We cannot risk putting a climate denier in the White House. At all, that is absolutely unacceptable.

We need a president who believes in science and who has a plan to lead America in facing this threat, creating good jobs, and yes, saving our planet.

So here's what I want to do.

First, we need to do a lot more on clean energy. The clean energy superpower of the 21st century is probably going to be either Germany, China, or us--and I want it to be us. And I want you to be part of making it us.

And we need to accelerate the transition to a clean energy economy and create high paying jobs, building and installing more solar panels and wind turbines. Modernizing our electric grid. Retrofitting buildings. Building resilient, 21st century infrastructure, and we have to make sure no community is left out or left behind--not our cities or our small towns or our remote, rural areas.

Now, you wouldn't know it if you only listened to my opponent talk about how terrible everything is. He has such a dark, divisive view of America, but that doesn't tell the story about what's really going on. It's actually pretty exciting. In red states and blue states, local leaders are stepping up. Rural electric co-ops are investing in community solar power and you see that across America -- union workers in Michigan, union workers in Michigan are getting ready to build electric Chevys in a plant powered by clean energy. Iowa, Iowa is already getting a third of its electricity from wind. Wind turbines are going up in New England and on Lake Erie. Renewable energy is already the fastest-growing source of new jobs in America. I think that is so exciting -- there are nearly 2 million people already working in energy efficiency.

And in Spartanburg, South Carolina, a project called ReGenesis is taking an old landfill and turning it into a solar farm. That landfill was a blight and a health threat, just 250 feet away from a residential neighborhood. Now, that same land will generate enough clean, renewable electricity to power 500 homes.

So this is what we can do. And I think Washington should back up and support doing more of that. As president, I want us to have 500 million solar panels installed across America by the end of my first term. And let's generate enough renewable energy to power every home in America within the decade. Let's make our buildings and factories more energy efficient and cut our oil consumption by one-third.

And we can get there by investing in cutting edge research, to keep developing cheaper and better clean energy technologies, investing in clean energy infrastructure and advanced manufacturing, putting big partnerships together between states, cities, and rural communities.

We can do all of this and create millions of good-paying jobs as we do. So I'm hoping that these good jobs will offer security and dignity while we produce the clean energy that will power the economy of the future. The clean energy solutions are being developed right here in America. We want them manufactured in America, installed in America, and putting people to work in America.

And while we do that, let's make sure our communities are ready for the impacts of climate change that are coming right at us. We need to invest in resilient infrastructure. Now, sometimes that will mean building a seawall; other times, let's be more creative -- like in New York Harbor, where we are replanting oyster beds to form natural barriers to storm surge. Sometimes we'll overhaul an outdated sewer system to deal with flooding from heavy downpours. In Philadelphia, they're trying something else: green roofs, porous pavements, curbside gardens to help absorb storm water.

And here's something we don't talk enough about. Let's make sure our hospitals can stay open and operational in any kind of disaster. Because sadly, I saw what happened in New York during Hurricane Sandy, newborns who had been on respirators had to be evacuated down nine flights of stairs in one New York hospital, because the electricity went off. Nurses, I love nurses -- heroic, courageous nurses were carrying those babies and manually squeezing bags of air to keep them breathing. Now, here in Miami, you know how important this is. You have retrofitted the Nicklaus Children's Hospital with a hurricane-resistant shell for exactly this reason. And every hospital in the country should follow your lead and build in more resilience.

And then finally, we have got to lead the world to confront the climate challenge. If we don't do it, nobody will do it. We must confront the climate challenge. There's no doubt about that. And so, let's move on with the kind of leadership that the world as well as our country deserves.

When I was Secretary of State, I worked with President Obama to make climate change a top diplomatic priority. We fought to get China and India and other major polluters to agree for the first time in history to be part of the solution. In fact, we had to crash a secret meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark -- slip past the guards -- it was all very cloak and dagger. But for a really important purpose, and because of that breakthrough, and a lot of patient, persistent work, and because of American leadership, 195 nations signed on to a global agreement last December. It's called the Paris Agreement. And I am not exaggerating when I say it is our last, best chance to solve the global, climate crisis.

And what does Donald Trump want to do? He wants to cancel the Paris Agreement. He doesn't care what it would do to the planet. He doesn't care how much that would damage American leadership in the world. He doesn't care what it would do to the future we leave our kids and our grandkids.

Well, he may not care -- but we do. And that's why this election is so critically important because on the ballot, it is not just my name. It's every issue we care about it's our values as a country.

Climate change needs to be a voting issue. We need to elect people up and down the ballot, at every level of government, who take it seriously and are willing to roll up their sleeves and get something done. Please, we cannot keep sending climate deniers and defeatists to Congress or to state houses--and certainly not to the White House.

And if you care about climate, your Senate race is also really important, and I'll tell you why. It is unacceptable, it is an unacceptable response for Marco Rubio, when asked about climate change to say, "I'm not a scientist.' Well, why doesn't he ask a scientist and then maybe then he'd understand why it is so important that he, representing Florida, be committed to climate change? That's why I hope that you'll elect Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate.

Look, we need leaders who can get results. It's easy to stonewall. It's not enough to protest: we need creativity, we need hard work. And when it comes to climate change, we don't have a minute to waste.

So, I know it's easy to get cynical--especially about our politics. I get that. But this election matters more than any has in a really long time, and I believe that as strongly as I can, we've got to address this issue for our sakes, our children, our grandchildren. And it's so critically important when you think about how leadership can make a difference.

And just look, if you will -- look at the difference between your state, the Sunshine State, which has less solar energy than New Jersey has right now. And do you know why? Because you have a governor who has ordered the state government never to use the words "climate change.' So my friends, this is a big deal in the election, and it is going to be a big deal for our country and our world. And there isn't anybody -- there isn't anybody who knows more, has done more, has worked harder. I know he was in Miami just last year, training and educating people to be climate change activists. I can't wait to have Al Gore advising me when I am President of the United States. So please join me in welcoming our former vice president, a climate change leader and an all-around great guy, Al Gore.

Al Gore

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you very much, Secretary Clinton, and ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for the warm welcome. I appreciated those kind words very much. I want to acknowledge all of the elected officials and distinguished guests who are here, and I want to say a special word of thanks to President Eduardo Padrón and Miami Dade College. I understand you've got a pretty good women's volleyball team here, so go Lady Sharks. Is that what you say?

I'm here today with two very simple messages. Number one, when it comes to the most urgent issue facing our country and the world, the choice in this election is extremely clear. Hillary Clinton will make solving the climate crisis a top national priority. Very important. Her opponent, based on the ideas that he has presented, would take us toward a climate catastrophe. So that's my first message: the climate crisis is and must be regarded as a top national priority and a top global priority.

Here is my second message: your vote really, really, really counts a lot. You can consider me as an Exhibit A of that truth. Now, for those of you younger -- for those of you who are younger than 25, you might not remember the election of 2000 and what happened here in Florida and across the country. For those of you older than 25, I heard you murmuring just now. But take it from me, it was a very close election. Elections -- well, here's my point. Here's my point. I don't want you to be in a position years from now where you welcome Hillary Clinton and say, actually, you did win, it just wasn't close enough to make sure that all the votes were counted or whatever.

Elections have consequences. Your vote counts. Your vote has consequences.

And in this election, the future of Miami and cities up and down the West Coast and East Coast of Florida are on the ballot as well. Indeed, the entire state of Florida and its future are on this ballot. So is our economy, our health, our national security. The common thread that binds all of these issues together: what we decide to do about carbon pollution and its damage to the ecological system of the Earth.

I don't have to tell you here in Florida that the climate crisis is real. Yes, it's true that some of your elected officials have not recognized that it's real, but every single night on the television news is like a nature hike through the Book of Revelation. You look at the floods and the droughts and the mudslides and the fires and the incredible downpours, and as Secretary Clinton just mentioned, Hurricane Matthew just recently. You know, it spun up from a tropical storm into a category five hurricane in just 36 hours. That's extremely unusual. And the reason that happened is the climate crisis is trapping so much extra heat in the Earth's system, equivalent to what would be released by 400,000 Hiroshima-class atomic bombs going off every day. It's a big planet, but that's a lot of energy, and it's warming the oceans -- more than 90 percent of that heat energy goes into the oceans.

And so the southern Caribbean, where it spun up into a category five so quickly, was much warmer than normal because of that; and the Gulf Stream is way warmer than normal for this time of year for the same reason.

So this means also that all the water vapor coming off the oceans into the atmosphere is brought over the land and so we get these record downpours. Just in the last year, we have seen one-in-a-thousand-year downpours in Louisiana, West Virginia, Texas, Maryland. In Houston, in one 12-month period, they've just had two 500-year floods and one 1,000-year downpour. In one of them, they had as much water dumped on Harris County, Texas, where Houston is, as would have been put there by three and a half days of the entire flow of Niagara Falls. This is not normal. It is becoming the new normal, which is now a set of conditions that we have created with all of this man-made global warming pollution.

Secretary Clinton also mentioned the sea level rise. We have seen already -- some of you who are a little bit older may remember Hurricane Andrew, when -- yeah, absolutely. When Hillary and I were first campaigning together in 1992, Hurricane Andrew came through. Just since Hurricane Andres, the sea level in the waters around Florida have gone up three inches since Hurricane Andrew. And every vertical inch of sea level rise means four to eight feet of the water going inward and the storm surges on top of that. And yes, there are now, at high tide, sometimes ocean -- fish from the ocean swimming in some of the streets of Miami Beach and Delray and Fort Lauderdale. And the rainfall in Carolina is -- Secretary Clinton mentioned what they're still dealing with there. They got 17 inches of rain because the warmer oceans not only make the wind speed much stronger than it has been in the past on average, but it also dumps all of that water on the land.

And she mentioned the role it plays in health. Just yesterday, there were six more cases of Zika announced in Dade County, and the public health authorities are doing a great job and really wrestling with it, and these tropical diseases have spread so quickly partly because of airline travel and the transportation revolution. But the changing climate conditions change the places where these tropical diseases become endemic and put down roots. The mosquitos mature faster, and then the virus in the mosquito incubates much faster, and they bite more often because they're cold-blooded and when the temperature goes up, their metabolism goes up, and they spread the disease way more quickly.

So these and many other consequences, including the fires out West that Secretary Clinton talked about, are really wakeup calls for us. Mother Nature is giving us a very clear and powerful message. We cannot continue putting 110 million tons of global warming pollution into the atmosphere every day as if it's an open sewer. We've got to stop that. We've got to wake up and recognize the need for change.

So most people know that we have to change this, but here's the really good news that more people should know. We can change this. We now have the ability to change this. It's going to be a long, hard fight. We've got a long way to go. But we now have the renewable energy technologies and the efficiency improvements and electric vehicles and sustainable and organic agriculture and sustainable forestry and the other ways of changing our lives for the better that can sharply diminish the amount of global warming pollution that we're putting up there. And Secretary Clinton is exactly right that we can create good jobs in the process, jobs that can't be outsourced.

She's also right that either China or Germany or some other country other than the U.S. could become the renewable energy superpower of this new century. One day last December, Germany, which is much higher in latitude than the U.S. and pretty cloudy at that -- one day they got 87 percent of all their electricity from wind and solar and renewable energy. We can be on track to do that as well. And China -- yes, China is the biggest polluter now, but they have begun to change big time. Their coal use is going down. Their overall emissions are going down. And they've just announced that this -- next year, in 2017, they're adopting a nationwide cap and trade program and they're taking other measures to reduce and to create those jobs in China.

And in Paris -- the Paris Agreement is a big deal. Yeah, it's not enough. Yes, it needed to do more. But it is by far the biggest step forward the world has ever taken to solve the climate crisis. Every nation in the world, virtually -- I think there were three or four little ones like maybe Nicaragua or something like that who didn't -- but virtually every nation in the world agreed to phase out these greenhouse gas emissions and go to net-zero emissions early in the second half of this century, and to begin that process now. And it sent a powerful signal to businesses and industries and investors. And I can tell you, that signal is being received. We hear news every single day of more businesses making that shift.

So the question in this election, and this comes back to my first message, is which of these candidates is going to continue the progress and actually increase the rate of progress? With Hillary Clinton, we'll build on the progress made under President Obama with the Paris Agreement and she will seize the opportunities. After all, solar electricity and wind electricity is now way cheaper than it was years ago when some of us started sounding the alarm about this crisis.

Hillary Clinton knows this very well, and she's worked with President Obama. Since the beginning of the Obama Administration, the cost of wind electricity has come down by half. Solar is down by 64 percent. LED is down by 94 percent. We have seen -- we've seen electricity from solar increase 30 times over. Last year in the entire United States in the calendar year 2015, if you look at all of the new electricity generation that was added in the U.S. last year, what percentage of it do you think was solar and wind? Seventy-one percent, virtually zero from coal. And it's already -- it's already creating millions of jobs and it continues to get cheaper and cheaper every single week. World records are being broken every month now as it continues to get cheaper.

Now, Hillary Clinton knows this not only because she has studied it and -- not only because she's worked with President Obama, but her work in the Senate emphasized this. Her work on child asthma and air pollution and helping to improve children's health by cutting down on air pollution was very important. Her work on environmental justice, helping call attention to the fact that it's the poor people and minority communities and people of color who are almost always victimized more than the rest of us on -- by these environmental crises.

And she has proposed a terrific plan to install -- well, she said it herself and I'm not going to repeat all of it, but I'll just say this. When she put out her solar plan -- a half a billion solar panels by the end of her first term and enough renewable energy to power every home in America -- I looked at that plan very carefully. And I will say to all of you, you will hear a lot of candidates for office who will put out plans that have words you're not even sure what they might mean because the words -- there are ways to put things. I went through that with a fine-tooth comb, and I will tell you that her plan on solar panels and expanding renewable energy -- it is right at the limit of what we can do, and that is exactly the kind of ambitious goal that we need from the next president of the United States of America.

Almost 100 years ago, America's most famous inventor, Thomas Edison, said these words -- it's an exact quote: "I would put my money on the sun and solar energy. What a source of power. I hope we don't have to wait until the oil and coal come out before we tackle that.'

Now, I want to say a brief word -- I'm going to return to my second main point here in a minute, but I want to say a brief word about something else that all of you can do. You can elect Patrick Murphy to the United States Senate instead of a climate denier. But here's something else you can do. Vote "no' on Initiative 1 on your ballot.

Hillary mentioned that there are fewer solar jobs in the Sunshine State, Florida, than there are in New Jersey. Actually, Florida also lags behind Massachusetts, which is even farther north. Despite having three times the population of Massachusetts, Florida has less than half of the solar jobs that have been created in Massachusetts. Massachusetts installed more solar energy last year alone than Florida has installed in its entire history.

And one -- yes, it's ridiculous. That's exactly right. And the head of one of the fossil-fuel-burning utilities here actually said last year, "Well, yes, Florida's the Sunshine State, but remember, it's also the partly cloudy state.' Well, they are trying to cloud the truth by putting forward a phony-bologna initiative that sounds like it protects solar. It doesn't protect solar. What -- the things they claim protect solar are protections you already have. But they trying to fool you into amending your state constitution in a way that gives them the authority to shut down net metering and do in Florida what they did in Nevada and just kill the solar industry.

Now, this is a question -- Our democracy has been hacked and the utilities -- the fossil utilities here have spent more than $20 million to try to pull the wool your eyes. And $20 million can buy a lot of wool. So Amendment 1 would benefit the incumbent fossil fuel companies here in Florida by making it harder for homeowners to go solar.

Now, let me close by returning to my second message. The stakes in this election simply could not be higher. You will often hear people from podiums like this one say something like that at election time. I know; I've heard it. I've even said it before. But honestly, to those of you here and those within the -- who can hear my voice by whatever means, this election really matters. The world is on the cusp of either building on the progress and solving the climate crisis, or stepping back, washing our hands of America's traditional role as the leader of the world and letting the big polluters call the shots.

The choice is that clear. It's that stark. The consequences for not just our children and grandchildren and future generations, but for all of us, are really quite significant. So because of that, please take it from me: Every single vote counts. Every single vote counts. If you are not registered to vote, do so today. If you are on the fence about whether to vote, remember what is at stake in this election. And if you think your vote does not matter, take it from me, your vote can make all of the difference in this election.

Vote early. Vote early and don't let your friends sit this election out. Early voting begins here in Dade County on October 24th and in several other parts of Florida it begins on October 24th. If you have any confusion whatsoever about where you vote or whether you're registered or whether you are going to the right polling place, visit iwillvote.com -- iwillvote.com. Say it with me: iwillvote.com. One more time. Iwillvote.com.

Now, if you want to be really in touch with this election process and get really involved in taking other people to the polls, there's a --if you like to text, then text "climate' -- the word "climate' -- to this number -- 47246 -- and you'll get updates. You'll get the information you need. And then even on Election Day you'll get updates on your polling place. So remember, text "climate' to 47246. Say it with me: 47246.

All right. Now, in closing, I've made two points. The climate crisis must be a top priority. We must have a president who gets it, who cares about it, who's internalized it, who's passionate about it, who's determined to lead our country, and with our country to lead the world at the key moment when we really do have the opportunity to solve this climate crisis and make our country stronger and more prosperous at the same time.

My second message is -- you know what it is -- every vote counts. That's why I am here and that's why I will vote for Hillary Clinton. I know that my vote counts. I know that your vote counts. I hope you will consider carefully the future in making your decision this November or beginning when early voting starts when you go into the ballot box.

Together, we have the opportunity to look back on this year as a time when our nation finally chose to answer the alarm bells on the climate crisis and went into action to solve it. I know that there are still some who doubt in their hearts that we as human beings and we as Americans have the ability to bring about such a big and important change. Do we have the capacity? I'll remind you that the will to change and build a brighter future is itself a renewable resource. Let's make Hillary Clinton the next president of the United States of America.

On Sunday, October 2, Hillary Clinton delivered the following remarks in Charlotte, North Carolina, on advancing social and economic justice in African American communities.
Clinton's remarks, as transcribed, are below:

"This is the day the Lord has made. Let us rejoice and be glad in it!I am so [] and so honored to be here. Thank you so much Reverend Dr. Walker. Thanks to the members of the Little Rock A.M.E. Zion. I have to confess -- we were putting together the [] Rev. Walker was []But he told me his church [] 134 years ago was founded in a house on a rock and that rock has been sturdy and steady []I am so delighted to be here with your Congresswoman, Congresswoman Adams, who has a [] path in the Congress, such a [] of conviction. And my thanks also to Donna [] for her leadership for that stirring description [] Thank you so much.

This church for all those years has been a source of strength and solace, for generations of congregants and [] It has helped people get []. It has helped people deal with the sorrows that come [] and it has [] the world outside challenged the faith that comes from belief. In here, in this magnificent house of worship, we pray for peace when there is too much violence outside of these walls. In here, we are called to confront injustice, even when the world out there fails to see it. In here, we see the world as it is, but we pray for the strength and wisdom to build the world as it should be.

It has been 12 days since Mr. Scott was shot and killed. Twelve days since his wife Rakeiya Scott watched her husband die, and seven children lost their father. Now we don't yet know all the details about the shooting, but we do know this family and this community is in pain. And therefore we pray for them and we pray for all families who have suffered similar losses. But we do more than pray. As Ms. Bradford said, "We do what each of us can do.' Not everyone can march, but everyone can talk, and everyone can reach out and everyone can vote.

Too many African American families have been in the same tragic situation that the Scott family has found themselves. In fact, the day before Mr. Scott died, another father, Terence Crutcher, was killed in a police encounter in Tulsa, Oklahoma. And there have been many others. So many fathers and sons and even mothers and daughters who have died either after encounters with the police or at the hands of civilians with guns while they were doing things that were ordinary, everyday activities. Walking home from the store with iced tea and Skittles, listening to music in their car with friends.

And we also know -- and we must not forget -- that violence has touched the families of police officers. Men and women who put on the uniform and put their lives on the line to protect others. From Dallas to Baton Rouge to Philadelphia, the families of fallen officers have also been dealt a great blow and they deserve our prayers as well.

It's been a hard year, hasn't it? Think about how many times President Obama has had to console our nation about another senseless tragedy, another shattered family, another distressed community. And our children are watching, and they feel it too. You've seen that right here in Charlotte. Last Monday at the city council meeting, 10-year-old Taje Gaddy said, "I wake up every morning scared that I won't get to grow up because I am black.'

A nine-year-old, Zianna Oliphant, who's here with us today, along with her brother Marquis and her family, also spoke at that city council meeting, with tears pouring down her face. And when I read what she had said, I had tears in my eyes too. She said, "We are black people and we shouldn't have to feel like this. It's a shame that our fathers and mothers are killed, and we can't even see them anymore. It's a shame that we have to go to their graveyard and bury them. We need our fathers and mothers to be by our side.' What courage and clarity that young lady showed to the world.

But can you imagine, nine years old. She should be thinking about happy adventures, dreaming about all the wonderful things her future holds for her. Instead she's talking about graveyards. Our entire country should take a moment to really look at what's going on here, and across America, to imagine what we see on the news, and what we hear about, imagine through our children's eyes.

I'm a grandmother, and like every grandmother I worry about the safety and security of my grandchildren, but my worries are not the same as black grandmothers. They have different, and deeper fears about the world that their grandchildren face. It makes my heart ache, when kids like Zianna, are going through this and trying to make sense of the absolutely senseless. I know how I would feel. I wouldn't be able to stand it if my grandchildren had to be scared and worried the way too many children across our country feel right now. But because my grandchildren are white, because they are the grandchildren of a former president and secretary of state, let's be honest here -- they won't face the kind of fear that we heard from the young children testifying before the city council.

You know, every child deserves the same sense of security, every child deserves the same hope. They should not be facing fear, they should be learning and growing, imagining who they can be, and what their contributions to our country could be as well. We've got to take action, we've got to start now, not tomorrow, not next year, now. We know we can't solve all these problems over night, which means we don't have a moment to lose.

Proverbs tells us, "Where there is no vision, the people perish.' So let's hold on to a common vision. Let's come together to make America a place where every child, no matter who they are, where they're born or what they look like, has the chance to live up to their God-given potential.

Being stronger together with this common vision means rejecting those forces that try to pit us against each other. We can acknowledge that implicit bias still exists, not just in police departments but throughout our country, without vilifying police officers. We can call for reforms to policing, while still appreciating the many courageous and admirable officers out there who are doing their jobs with honor and integrity.

I think about an officer named Montrell Jackson. You might not have heard of him, but I want you to. He was one of the officers murdered in Baton Rouge. A few days before he died, he wrote on Facebook, he was black but he wore blue. "In uniform,' he wrote, "I get nasty, hateful looks. Out of uniform, some consider me a threat. These are trying times. Please don't let hate infect your heart.' And then he closed by saying that if anyone saw him on patrol and wanted a hug, "I got you.'

Montrell Jackson knew that making our communities safer and juster are not conflicting ideas. And most officers will tell you they can't do one without the other. I believe we need end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system, not half measures but full measures, with real follow-through. In America everyone should be respected by the law and have respect for the law.

That starts with being honest. Being unafraid to face the facts. Face the fact that black men are far more likely to be stopped, searched by police, charged with crimes and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for doing the same thing. We need to fix a system where too many black parents are taken from their kids and imprisoned for minor offenses. We need to make sure our police officers are trained in de-escalating tense situations. We need to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline, and instead invest in education from early childhood through high school into higher education. And yes we have got to fight for common sense reforms to stop the epidemic of gun violence in our communities.

Gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young black men, more than the next nine causes combined. We've got to make sure there are good jobs, equality affordable housing in every zip code in America. We need to make investments in communities that have been left out and left behind. I am a strong supporter of Congressman Jim Clyburn's plan to put 10 percent of our federal funds into 20 percent of the communities that have generational poverty for 30 years or more.

Now, there are some out there who see this as a moment to command the flames of resentment and division. Who want to exploit people's fears, even though it means tearing our nation even further apart. They say that all of our problems will be solved simply by more "law and order.' As if the systemic racism plaguing our country doesn't exist. Now, of course we need safe neighborhoods, no one is against that. Of course, we need communities that are free from the epidemic of gun violence, of course we need that. But we also need justice and dignity and equality, and we can have both. This is not an either-or question for America.

I want us to commit ourselves to this common vision. That is where I will build on the work that President Obama has done. And I will be sure that this is not just about a campaign or an election. This is much bigger than an election. These are issues I've been fighting for since I was a young lawyer working for the Children's Defense Fund. Going to South Carolina to try to get young teenagers, 13, 14-year-olds out of jails with adult offenders. I care deeply about this because it's not just personal to so many of us, it's about the kind of country you want to be and the future we want for all of our children and grandchildren. I think about that every time I see my grandchildren or every time I see a bright, energetic, impressive young woman like Zianna. Come up here a minute, would you?

I love your dress.

You know, God loves us all, right? We are called to care for and cherish each other. It's not easy, it is not. But that is our mission and that is what we are called to do, not only as Christians but as Americans, as human beings to understand and respect each other. To fight for each other's children, each other's dignity, each other's opportunity as if they were our own. Now, make no mistake, this is not easy work. You've been doing this since Adam and Eve came here. But it is righteous work. Protecting all of God's children is America's calling. Remember what scripture also tells us: "Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.' We will not grow weary and we will not lose heart. We will get up every single day have faith in one another and in our future and work for that better day for all of God's people. Thank you."

"Hello! Thank you! Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you so very much. Wow, what -- what a wonderful welcome. It is great to be here in Fort Pierce in this beautiful theater. I love being in the Sunshine State. I really want to recognize a few people: U.S. Congresswoman Lois Frankel is here as you saw, Randy Perkins, a candidate for Congress, Kim Johnson, chair of the St. Lucie County Commission, Larry Lee Jr., state representative. Everyone, all of the elected officials, all of the students and young people, it is wonderful to be with you.

And I want to thank Eileen for her introduction. We know how hard that nurses like Eileen work, and now that she is retired, she is volunteering for our campaign. This woman never quit, and Eileen, we are so glad you are on our team.

I am grateful to all of the elected officials, all of the commissioners, the county commissioners, Martin County, St. Lucie, for all you do for the community, but especially for all you did this summer to clean up the algae that polluted the water, that threatened wildlife and made life hard for local residents and businesses. This is a serious and complicated problem, isn't it, for the entire Treasure Coast. And it is a reminder, if we needed it, how important good leadership is. So, I thank all the leaders for their commitment.

Now, there are just 39 days between now and November 8th. Just 39 days left in the most important election in our lifetimes.

We've got to make every single day count. We have to get more people registered to vote, get more people committed to turn out to vote. We have to drive home the stakes in this election: stronger families, safer communities and an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And underneath all of the rhetoric and the coverage and the back and forth, this campaign really comes down to two questions. What kind of future we want for ourselves, our kids and our grandkids, and how do we make it a reality?

Now, as I said it the other night -- how many of you saw the debate?

Well as I said, I now have two grandchildren, and no offense to anybody, the two most wonderful, amazing, extraordinary. A little girl and a little boy. So I think a lot about the future. And you may have noticed that my opponent and I have different views about -- well, nearly everything when it gets right down to it -- not just about what makes America great, because I think America already is great -- but about what we should do to make it even greater, and about that basic question about how progress happens at all.

My opponent believes in what I call a "strongman approach.' He stood on that stage at his convention and described a hopeless, broken nation. I am sorry, I am looking at you. I don't see that. That in no way resembles the strong, vibrant America I know. And here's what he said. He said, "I alone can fix it.' I alone?

Well, we have learned that that's his way. One person getting supreme power and exercising it ruthlessly. That's why he admires dictators like Vladimir Putin so much. But that's not how change happens in America. It's never just one person, not even someone as powerful as the president. Every good our country has ever achieved has always happened because people have worked together to make it a reality. Not just the wealthy or the powerful -- all of us.

We see that every day across America, and I bet many of you have been a part of it. Maybe you taught kids to read, right? Or cleaned up your local park, or the beach, maybe you have organized a cancer walk, or you have run a food drive. Whatever it is, chances are you have done something to serve your community. And by extension, your country.

How many of you -- just think back over your lives -- how many of you have performed some kind of service of some sort for your community, for other people. The reason I know you have is because tens and tens of millions of Americans do some kind of volunteering in your hometowns every single year. It's one of the best things about the American people. We are doers. We don't just shrug our shoulders when we see something that needs fixing, we don't get resigned or pathetic, or blame other people and turn on each other to find scapegoats. We roll up our sleeves, we get to work to try to make things better in our neighborhood, our community, our city, our state, our country.

This has been our story, the American story, since the beginning of our nation, and it is still going strong today. Now, for many Americans, including a lot of you here, serving our country has included serving in our Armed Forces.

People are starting to call out their services!

There is no greater service or sacrifice, and we are grateful to our men and women in uniform, to their families and our veterans every single day. But what's so great is that national service can take many different forms, and it's something that I believe in so deeply, that every stage of our lives gives us the chance, from grade school through grandparenthood, to find a way to give back.

We've got folks here today from AmeriCorps, which my husband created back in 1993, and I'll tell you, to this day, it is one of his proudest achievements. Because very day, AmeriCorps volunteers are out there. They're building houses, responding to natural disasters, helping people with disabilities find jobs, find safe places to live, and next week, on October 7th, AmeriCorps will celebrate a major milestone: their one-millionth member. I'll tell you, Bill is really excited about this and so am I. And by the way, AmeriCorps has one of the best swearing in pledges I have ever heard. Here's how it starts: "I will get things done for America.' Isn't that great? I think we should make that a national slogan.

Now we also have folks here today from City Year, which is part of AmeriCorps. And every day, they're working with students who are risk of dropping out of school. They're tutoring and mentoring and running after school clubs -- all to help young people really discover how capable they really are and to be empowered and to stay in school. I'm really grateful to them.

We also have people here today from the Peace Corps, which represents the best of America to the world. Peace Corps volunteers are teaching English in Kosovo, staffing health centers in Nicaragua, supporting farmers in Nepal, distributing malaria nets in Uganda. Both as First Lady and as Secretary of State, I got to see the results of their work first hand. They are making the world a healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful place. Now, maybe not all of you have been a part of one of these programs, but I know you serve in different ways.

Maybe you volunteer through your school, or with your church or synagogue. Maybe you find through faith-based opportunities, as I did when I was a teenager, service opportunities. Because for many Americans, service is part of our faith. My running mate, Tim Kaine, volunteered in Honduras with Jesuits as a young man, and it changed his life. Or maybe your whole family volunteers together, Bill and Chelsea and I, every holiday season, would work at a food bank back in Arkansas. However you serve, it feels good, doesn't it? To be part of something bigger than ourselves. To take our time and labor, and put it towards something good that can happen in our country and the world.

And you know something very interesting? Service makes us happier, it makes us healthier, and there are studies proving that. It's not just how we feel, they've actually followed people. It can also help us find our next job, or our true calling in life. It's a smart way to use our greatest asset in life, our people. And service does something important for us as a society. Too often, we Americans can become separated from each other, and I think a lot of people are feeling this way during this election.

It's easy to surround ourselves with only those that think like us, talk like us, look like us, read the same news as us, that's understandable to an extent. But it comes with a cost because it magnifies our differences, which then makes it harder to put those differences aside when our community or country needs us. There aren't many places where people of all ages, all races, all backgrounds, all beliefs come together in common cause. But service is one of them, and that's one of the reasons I think it's so valuable, because in addition to the good work it does, it helps us reconnect with each other to feel more a part of our shared American life.

I believe that one of the jobs of President is to encourage more service, to help more Americans answer President Kennedy's call. You know it: Ask not what your country can do for you but what you can do for your country.'

But sometimes it's hard to figure out. How do you make a difference, especially with everything else going on in our lives? And too often volunteering becomes something only people with lots of time and financial security can do. But that's not how it should be. Everyone should be able to contribute.

So what if we, as a country, made it easier for everybody to do that, for everybody to give back? What if we created more service opportunities for Americans of all ages, invested in programs that work and encouraged entrepreneurs to add a social component to their businesses? What if we strengthened the culture of service in America so it wasn't just something that we did one day a year, but it became a regular part of our lives. I think that would reflect our values and would tap into something so great about America.

I talk a lot about how America is an exceptional nation. We're not exceptional just because of the size of our military or the size of our economy. We're exceptional because of the generosity and ingenuity of our people.

Way back, nearly 200 years ago, a Frenchman came to the United States, his name was Alexis de Tocqueville. He was travelling around, trying to figure out, "What is this new place called America? They fought a revolution. Who are they?' And he saw how we had set up our government, and we had three branches, and everything that our founders really put into place. But the thing that made the biggest impression on him was our spirit of volunteerism that made a democracy as diverse and ambitious as ours possible. If I'm elected president this fall, I want to build on that strength by making a major push in support of more national service. So here's what I plan to do.

First, let's triple AmeriCorps. That was the goal of my friend and the great Senator Ted Kennedy. It was laid out in a law named in his honor, the Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act. It's finally time we get it done. Every year there are hundreds of thousands of more applications for AmeriCorps than there are spots in the program, so if we grow the program from 75,000 annual members to 250,000, we're going to give more people who already want to serve the chance to do so.

Then I want to double the college scholarships that AmeriCorps members earn through their service, and I want to find ways for more students to get college credit for service because I know too many talented, committed young people who pass up serving with AmeriCorps because, with their student loans, they can't afford it. So let's lighten that burden. If you do national service, we will begin a program to forgive your loans, because you are giving back to your country. And let's keep working to the ultimate goal of making it possible for any American to serve full time if they want to.

Now second, let's grow the Peace Corps. Since President Kennedy launched it 55 years ago, it's given nearly a quarter of a million Americans the experience of a lifetime, and it's fostered friendship and cooperation between Americans and people in more than 100 nations. We've got to do more of that in the world today. We need more Americans of all ages around the world showing our values, serving people. So let's make it possible for more Americans to be a part of this extraordinary program.

Third, let's expand service opportunities for people of all ages. Right? Now, let's be fair, the younger generation is way ahead on this. I've talked to so many young people who are deeply thoughtful about how your lives impact others and the world. Service isn't just something to do to check a box before graduation, it really is woven into your lives. And many who are just getting started in your careers, say that having a social impact is more important to you than getting a job that yes, may pay a salary but doesn't give you any meaning or purpose in your lives.

Now I also want to get older Americans more involved. Service isn't something only students and young people do. I know that. So I intend to make sure that 10 percent of AmeriCorps slots go to Americans over the age of 55. Let's give people an encore opportunity after they've ended their formal careers so they can apply a lifetime of knowledge and experience to a stronger community.

And finally, I want to create a new means for people to serve in serious, meaningful ways without a full time commitment. AmeriCorps is a full time commitment. The Peace Corps is a full time commitment. The Armed Forces are a full time commitment. But the Armed Forces has another model. The Reserves -- right? It gives people the chance to make a high impact contribution while still building careers and pursuing their dreams in other ways. So let's do something like that in the civilian space. Let's call it the National Service Reserve.

And here's the idea. If you join the National Service Reserve, you will receive some basic training, just like you would in the military reserves, and then when your city or state needs you, you'll get the call. Say a natural disaster strikes and the Red Cross needs all hands on deck. Or maybe, like the crisis in Flint, and clean water has to be distributed every day to a lot of families. Or maybe your city launches a major public health campaign to reduce drug abuse or promote mental health. You will then be sent into action. Now some of these assignments maybe just be for a few days, a month, some might be longer term. But they will directly address a vital need in your own community.

And one of the other advantages is you can help meet that need while still being a full-time student, having a job, taking care of your family. You won't have to make service your only priority. Our goal is 5 million people spread across all 50 states, and we will have an open door to people of all ages, but we want to put a special focus on people under 30 who've said again and again they want to have a bigger impact in their communities, but they can't leave their jobs, understandably. We'll work with governors and mayors, Republicans and Democrats, because I want this to be a true bipartisan, public-private partnership.

I also want to include businesses, colleges and universities who have unique resources to offer. And because we want workers and students to know that as they make this contribution, their schools and their employers will have their backs. I really think a National Service Reserve could make a difference for cities and states. There's so much work to be done and so many people who want to help do it. So let's bridge that divide, get people working together in ways that can help communities.

Now, I don't think you'll hear anything about this from my opponent. And you know what? I think that's a shame, because national service has always been a bipartisan goal. Of course, President Kennedy started the Peace Corps and my husband started AmeriCorps -- but President Nixon signed the Domestic Volunteer Service Act. President George H.W. Bush created the White House Office of National Service. And both President George W. Bush and President Obama have been huge champions of service. This should be something that we all can get behind. And when you listen to what's being said in this campaign, it can be discouraging, right? It can seem hard to find any common ground so it makes it even more important that we come together where, whenever we can. Now, I am well aware that candidates don't usually focus on national service in the final stretch of a hotly fought presidential election. Some might say, "Well hey, my gosh, you've only got 39 days to go. Why aren't you just out there beating up on your opponent and doing everything to get the vote out and all the rest of it? Well, I'll do that, but -- I've been thinking about this for a long time, and I did not want this campaign to end without talking about it because it means a lot to me. I'm trying to end the campaign focusing on issues that are really close to my heart -- and this is one of them.

Thank you!

For me, service is really all about fulfilling the instruction of my Methodist faith, and you can see part of the creed I like to follow behind me: "Do all the good you can, in all the ways you can, in all the places you can, at all the times you can, to all the people you can, as long as ever you can.' Now, I've carried those words with me ever since I heard them as a little girl, and it's an idea that really got into my head and my heart. But you know what's kept me going are the people that I've met. And in a country founded on liberty and equality, I can't think of a more important notion than every one of us is valuable. We all deserve respect. We all should listen to each other. We all can make our mark on the world. And when we come together in common purpose, we can do so much more than we could ever do on our own.

That's why "Stronger Together' is more than just a slogan. It's a course of action. So here's what I want to do. I want you to hear me pledge that this will be a vital aspect of my presidency. And I want you to help me bring our nation together -- to solve our problems, strengthen our communities. To join with people across America who care about service, because this speaks to both what is great and good about the United States. America is great because we are good. There are lots of examples. We are going to be putting examples up on my website of people who have served and who are inspirations. But I want everybody here to know that it can be done. We can do more, and we can provide the opportunities to enlist more people.

There are so many examples in this community and communities across America -- 39 days left. This is the choice: do we lift each other up, or do we tear each other down? Do we listen and respect each other, or do we scapegoat, point fingers, and insult each other? Well, I'll tell you what side I'm going to be on, and with your help, we're going to demonstrate on November 8th, what kind of country we really are.

Thank you and God bless you!"

"Hello, Orlando! Wow. Thank you all so much. I am so happy to be back and I want to thank all of you for being here today at the Frontline Outreach Youth and Family Center, which does so much good work in the community. I want to acknowledge your terrific mayor, Mayor Buddy Dyer, who was here earlier. I want to thank Pastor Wynn, Tiffany Namey, the chair of the Orange County Disability Caucus, and everyone -- especially Val Demings. Where's Val? Val -- I know -- got this crowd really whipped up, and I want you to stay whipped up for Val. She is going to be a great member of Congress for everything that we care about and are fighting for.

I want to thank Anastasia for that introduction. Didn't she do an amazing job? I first met Anastasia when she was nine years old. She raised her hand at a town hall and she said, "My twin sister can't speak. Because of that, they put her in a separate class, apart from the rest of the kids. But she can communicate with a computer. And she's very smart and would do just as well as anyone else, if the principal and teachers would just give her a chance.' I was just blown away by this nine-year-old girl -- her confidence and how much she loved her sister.

So Anastasia and I have stayed in touch over the years. When she grew up, she became an intern in the Senate. I was so proud of her speech at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia too. And I'm very excited that she's here with us today.

I also want to thank Orlando. It's great to be back in this wonderful city with all of you. You've been through a lot this year. And what has been so notable is you've responded with grace. You've shown the world what Orlando is made of -- strength, love and kindness. This is something we could all use more of right now.

I'm here today to talk about how to make our economy work for everyone, but first, I need to say something about two very upsetting incidents that took place over the past few days. First, an unarmed man named Terence Crutcher was shot and killed by a police officer in Tulsa. Then, a man named Keith Lamont Scott was shot and killed by a police officer in Charlotte. I'm sending condolences and prayers to their families; I know a lot of you are as well.

There is still much we don't know about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African Americans killed by police officers in these encounters. It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable.

We also saw the targeting of police officers in Philadelphia last week. And last night in Charlotte, 12 officers were injured in demonstrations following Keith Lamont Scott's death. Every day, police officers across our country are serving with extraordinary courage, honor and skill. We saw that again this weekend in New York and New Jersey and Minnesota. Our police handled those terrorist attacks exactly right. And they likely saved a lot of lives. I've spoken to many police chiefs and other law enforcement leaders who are as deeply concerned as I am and deeply committed, as I am, to reform. Why? Because they know it is essential for the safety of our communities and our officers. We are safer when communities respect the police and police respect communities.

I've also been privileged to spend a lot of time with mothers who have lost children, and young people who feel that, as far as their country's concerned, their lives seem disposable. We've got to do better. And I know we can. And if I'm elected president, we will -- and we will do it exactly together, which is the only way it can be done.

Look, I know I don't have all the answers. I don't know anyone who does. But this is certain: too many people have lost their lives who shouldn't have.

Sybrina Fulton has become a friend of mine. Her son, Trayvon Martin, was killed not far from where we are today. Sybrina says, "This is about saving our children.' And she's absolutely right. We need to come together, work together -- white, black, Latino, Asian, all of us -- to turn the tide, stop the violence, build the trust. We need to give all of our kids, no matter who they are, the chance to grow up safe and healthy in their communities and in our country.

Now, there are so many issues we need to take on together, and that's why we're here today. Because in just 48 days -- can you believe it, 48 days -- Americans will go to the polls and choose our next president. Well, I hope so. I hope so. I want to just stress that our campaign is about the fundamental belief that, in America, every person, no matter what you look like, who you are, who you love, you should have the chance to go as far as your hard work and dreams will take you. And that is the basic bargain that made our country great, and it's our job to make sure it's there for you and future generations.

Building an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top, is the central challenge of our time. And I take it personally, because I'm a proud product of the American middle class. My grandfather started working in a lace mill in Scranton, Pennsylvania, when he was just a boy, and worked there for 50 years. Thanks to him, my dad was able to go to college and then start his own small business, printing fabric for draperies. And because of my dad and my mom, I could head out into the world and follow my dreams.

Every American family should be able to write a similar story for themselves and their children. And history has shown us -- our history has shown us that the strongest growth in our economy is inclusive, broad-based growth -- when everyone can contribute to our prosperity and share in its rewards.

Now, here is just one example. The flood of women into the American workforce over the past several decades was responsible for more than $3.5 trillion in economic growth. But as women's labor participation has slowed in recent years, due in part to our failure to provide family-friendly policies like paid leave and affordable childcare, so our economic growth wasn't as strong as it could have been. Women who want to work deserve to work. And whenever they are denied that opportunity, it's not fair to them -- and we all lose out. In a competitive 21st century global economy, we cannot afford to leave talent on the sidelines. When we leave people out or write them off, we not only shortchange them and their dreams, we shortchange our country and our own futures.

That's one reason why I care so much about supporting working parents. It's one reason why I'm such a strong supporter of comprehensive immigration reform. Because bringing millions of undocumented workers into the formal economy will decrease abuse and exploitation, and it will increase our economic breath and our tax base. It is estimated if we did this, despite what you hear from the other side, we would increase our gross domestic product by an estimated $700 billion in 10 years. Now, we need that.

It's also one reason why we've got to break down barriers of systemic racism, including under-investment that has held communities of color back for generations. That's part of building an inclusive economy, too. And it's why I believe we need to do more to help young people, who are left behind in the wake of the Great Recession, find those strategies and opportunities that will get them moving ahead again. And we've got to help older Americans who've displaced by automation and outsourcing in our changing economy.

And too often, training and retraining doesn't work as it should. If you don't have a four-year degree, if you haven't really had the chance to upgrade your skills over the years, it's hard to just make a course correction. We need to have apprenticeships and community college and technical programs, starting in high school and moving all the way up to older workers. Whether you're trying to start your career or you've spent decades contributing to our economy, you deserve better.

Now, these are some of the elements of my plan for an inclusive economy, and I'm going to hold up the book Tim Kaine and I have put out because we've actually put in one place all of our plans. You see, we have this old-fashioned idea if we're asking you to support us, we should tell you what we're going to do. Right? And today I want to focus on one area that hasn't gotten enough attention. It concerns a group of Americans who are too often invisible, overlooked, and undervalued, who have so much to offer but are given too few chances to prove it. Now, that's been true for a long time, and we have to change it.

I'm talking about people with disabilities, men and women, boys and girls, who have talents, skills, ideas, and dreams for themselves and their families just like anybody else. Whether they can participate in our economy and lead rich, full lives that are as healthy and productive as possible is a reflection on us as a country. And right now, in too many ways, we are falling short. We've got to face that and do better for everyone's sake because this really does go to the heart of who we are as Americans. I intend this to be a vital aspect of my presidency.

I want to bring us together as a nation to recognize the humanity and support the potential of all of our people. And I want you to hear this because this is not well-known. Nearly one in five Americans lives with a disability. Now, some of those disabilities are highly visible, some much harder to notice. If you don't know you know someone with a disability, I promise you, you do. But their disability is just one part of who they are.

Across the country, people with disabilities are running businesses, teaching students, caring for our loved ones. They're holding public office, making breakthrough scientific discoveries, reporting the news, and creating art that inspires and challenges us. They're veterans whose service and sacrifice has protected our freedom and kept our country safe. They're working in the White House. Just last year a young woman named Leah Katz-Hernandez became the first West Wing receptionist who is deaf. So when world leaders come to the White House, the person who greets them is Leah. Think of the message that sends about how our nation sees the talent in everyone.

And Americans with disabilities are working on presidential campaigns. I know because several of my staff and advisors have disabilities, and they're doing phenomenal work. I'm grateful to them every single day. And people all over America would say the same about their boss, their colleague, their employee, their family member with a disability.

Now, over the past few days, our country has taken leaps forward, not just in recognizing the humanity and dignity of people with disabilities, but in making long-overdue changes in our schools, workplaces, and communities so everyone can be part of our shared American life. Even so, not that long ago if you had a disability -- if you couldn't see, couldn't walk, lived with dyslexia or muscular dystrophy or some other health issue -- that one fact was allowed to define your entire life. Because of that and that alone, the world was closed to you. Not all of it and not for everyone, but for most people, basic essential things that others could do you couldn't and never would. And that was that.

I saw this for myself, as Anastasia said, years ago when I was just starting out as a young lawyer working with the Children's Defense Fund. One of my first assignments was to figure out why so many American kids weren't in school. We looked at census tract numbers and we said, okay. How many young people between five and 18 live in this census tract? Then we would look at school enrollment numbers, and there'd be a gap. And we would say, wait a minute. Where are the kids? Why aren't they in school?

I went door to door, along with people across our country, going into different communities. I was in New Bedford, Massachusetts. We saw a notable disparity there, and I soon realized that part of the problem was kids were stuck at home because of disabilities. There were kids who were hard of hearing, kids with intellectual disabilities. I remember one little girl in a wheelchair who was smart, curious, desperate to go to school. But that chair held her back. Not all schools had ramps or accessible bathrooms. Most teachers and aides weren't trained to help her. So she didn't get to go. It felt like the world had said to her, sorry, kid. Your life just isn't going to be worth very much. And she and her family weren't rich. They weren't powerful. So what could they do about it?

That little girl reminded me of another little girl, my mother. She didn't face the same challenges, but she, too, was clocked from a full and happy childhood -- abandoned by her own parents, raised by grandparents who didn't want her, and ended up on her own when she was just 14, supporting herself as a housemaid. But then something finally went her way. The woman she worked for encouraged her to finish high school. And that family showed my mother what a happy family looked like. After many lonely years, it was the start of a better life.

The core lesson from her childhood was that none of us gets through life alone. We all have to look out for each other and lift each other up. And I remembered that, sitting with that little girl in a wheelchair. My colleagues and I at the Children's Defense Fund, along with others, gathered the facts, and we built a coalition of activists and families across America, and together we helped convince Congress to pass a groundbreaking law saying that children with disabilities have the same right to be educated in public school just like any other kids.

So we opened the doors to school, and then some years later I was so excited when the Americans with Disabilities Act finally passed, 26 years ago. It was bipartisan. The notion that workplaces and public spaces belong to everyone was something Democrats and Republicans both supported. And, by the way, I'm proud that some of the Democrats and Republicans who passed that landmark bill are supporting my campaign because they know where my heart is on this.

As Secretary of State, I appointed the first-ever special advisor for international disability rights because I wanted America to stand up for the rights and dignity of people with disabilities all over the world. And over the years, I've spent a lot of time working for kids with disabilities. In addition to Anastasia, who spoke at the convention, another young man, Ryan Moore, also spoke there. I first met Ryan when he was 7 years old. I was fighting for health care reform. He was born with a rare form of dwarfism. But he never let that stop him. He's had so many surgeries, we've lost count of them. But his family was always there for them and -- for him. And he was the advocate for himself as he got older. Now he's a college graduate working in the technology department of his local school district. And he's just one of the most optimistic people you'll ever meet.

Listening to Ryan and Anastasia tell their stories at the convention this July made me think about all the people who never got the chance, never got the chance to get the education, let alone go to college, become forces for change. And I thought about all of the mothers and fathers across America who love their children more than anything and want so badly for them to have every opportunity that they deserve to have in America.

I'll never forget something that the actor Christopher Reeve said. Some of you may be too young to know who he was. He was a huge star. He played Superman. He was unbelievably good-looking. He and his wonderful wife were friends of mine. And then he was paralyzed in a horse-riding accident. He once said that he had been thinking about a phrase that comes up a lot in our politics, "family values.' "Since my accident,' he said, "I've found a definition that seems to make sense. I think it means that we're all family and we all have value.' I couldn't agree more.

We've come a long way since the fall of 1973, when I was going door to door talking to kids and families. But make no mistake. We still have a lot more work to do. We can't be satisfied, not when over 60 percent of adults with disabilities aren't in the workforce, not when businesses are allowed to pay employees with disabilities a subminimum wage [cheers and applause], not when people with physical and intellectual disabilities are still subjected to stigma and discrimination every single day. We've got to build an inclusive economy that welcomes people with disabilities, values their work, treats them with respect.

Now, one advocate after another has told me the same thing, "We don't want pity. We want paychecks. We want the chance to contribute.' As president, I'm going to give -- give them that chance. First, we're going to focus on jobs and incomes. I'm going to fight to give more Americans with disabilities the chance to work alongside those without disabilities and do the same jobs for the same pay and benefits. People with disabilities shouldn't be isolated. They should be given the chance to work with everyone else. And we're going to eliminate the subminimum wage, which is a vestige from an ugly, ignorant past. Good work deserves fair pay, no matter who you are.

Second, we're going to work with our colleges and universities to make them more accessible to students with disabilities. To have a truly inclusive economy, we need a truly inclusive education system. So let's raise our standards. For too long, accessibility has been an afterthought. Let's make it a priority in our curriculums, our classrooms, and the technology our students use. It's like what Anastasia said about her sister. She can communicate through a computer. Then let's make sure kids who can communicate that way have the opportunity to do so.

Third, we're going to partner with businesses and other stakeholders to ensure those living with a disability can get hired and stay hired. As part of that, we'll launch a new effort we're calling Autism Works to help people with autism succeed in the workplace.

Fourth, let's build on the success of the Americans with Disabilities Act by finally ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It has the strong backing of leaders across the political spectrum, and it's a chance to show American values and American leadership. And I have to tell you ever since I was first lady, I have had the great privilege of traveling the world on behalf of our country. When I was secretary of state, I went to 112 countries. And one of the things that I have noticed is how far behind many countries are in how they treat people with disabilities. Very often people with disabilities from the time they are babies and toddlers are locked away, basically forgotten. I want us since we have been the leader in this area to get that ratified and then to demonstrate to other countries what we have done and are doing to give dignity and opportunity to people with disabilities.

Now, these ideas are just a start. We're working with advocates to come up with even more. If you've got an idea, we want to hear it. Go to hillaryclinton.com and leave your ideas because we are really welcoming this debate. This issue is very close to my heart.

I've always believed that the ultimate test of our society is more than the size of our economy or the strength of our military. It's how we treat our fellow human beings, especially the most vulnerable among us. And on this front especially, I intend for my presidency to move our country forward. Together, we will make our economy and our country more welcoming to people with disabilities because we all win when everyone gets to share in the American dream.

Now, if you want some proof, let me tell you this story. It's a story of a woman named Freia David. Now, some of you may have read about Freia in the Boston Globe. I've carried a copy of that article around with me because I loved it so much. Freia has Down syndrome. When she was 21, she got her first job, at the local McDonald's. Her mother was a little worried, as any mother would be. She wondered, would Freia be able to handle being independent? Could she handle the job? Would she even pass the six-month training program? Well, not everyone in her class passed, but Freia did. And then -- then she excelled at that job for 32 years. Her colleagues loved her, and she loved them. The restaurant became such a home to her that she'd bring her family there on off days just to hang out.

Earlier this year, Freia began to show signs of early-onset dementia. She knew that meant she had to stop working, but 32 years is a pretty good run, isn't it? It broke her heart. One thing that made it a little better is the whole staff threw a party in her honor. Her family hoped a few people might show up. And in the end, nearly 100 people did: customers, colleagues and friends from over the years. The party lasted three hours. And at one point, one of Freia's former managers asked for everyone's attention. She turned to Freia, and she said, "We love you. We appreciate you. We respect you. And we are all better people for having you in our lives.'

My friends, after years of hard work and treating people right, isn't that what we all want to hear? Isn't that America at our best? We don't thrive on tearing each other apart, or separating ourselves. We know we are stronger together. We believe in equality and dignity for all. And when we fall short, we strive to do better, not to blame and scapegoat but to improve ourselves, to move toward becoming that more perfect union that our founders hoped for. This election is a chance for us to move still closer to that goal, to make sure everyone can contribute to a growing and prospering America, to say loudly and clearly in this country, no one's worthless, no one's "less than.' We're all of value. In the United States of America, the greatest country in the world, we believe everyone is created equal. And you know what else we believe? We all believe love trumps hate.

Thank you all."

"Hello. It's so great to be back here with all of you tonight. I want to thank my friend, Congressman Jim Clyburn; Don Peebles; Representative Butterfield; members of the Congressional Black Caucus; and congratulate all of the honorees. On a personal note, I want to recognize a dear friend who is retiring after 46 years, Congressman Charles Rangel. He is one of a kind, and we are grateful for your years of service.

And what can I say about one of the best Presidents this country has ever had, Barack Obama? All through this campaign, I have made the point over and over again, President Obama saved our country from a second Great Depression. He brought Osama bin Laden to justice. And so much more. I, for one, don't think he gets the credit he deserves for doing what he's done on behalf of our country and the world. And it's not just the President he's been, but the man he is. Even when hateful nonsense is thrown their way, Barack, Michelle, their two beautiful daughters, have represented our country with class, grace, and integrity. As Michelle says, "When others go low, we go high.' I know I speak for not just everyone in this room but so many tens of millions of Americans: Mr. President, not only do we know you are an American, you're a great American! And you make us all proud to be Americans, too.

Let me thank the leadership of the CBC Foundation for this great honor, and to thank all of my friends in the Congressional Black Caucus for it as well. I dedicate it to all the trailblazers who came before me who blazed trails that I could follow in their footsteps -- Barbara Jordan. Shirley Chisholm. I would not be standing here without them. Generations of women and men who struggled and sacrificed and cleared a path for all of us.

This award is also for everyone out there helping to break down the barriers holding Americans back, to leaders like all of you, and to a rising generation of young activists. To all those on the front lines dedicated to the proposition that in America, every single child deserves the chance to fulfill his or her God-given potential. This has been the cause of my life ever since I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund all those years ago. And I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career and the way that I will serve as your president, focused on opportunities for our children and fairness for our families.

We have so much work to do together. I've heard many heartbreaking stories over this campaign. One was from Tianna Gaines-Turner, a working mother to three children from Northeast Philadelphia. She testified at the DNC platform meeting in June and told us how her husband had been laid off and she worked in a part-time job. She said she'd been hungry more times than she could count, and that life felt like a maze, because she faced barriers no matter which way she turned. But despite all of this, Tianna has hope. She still believes that her 8-year-old daughter will be president one day. And she believes that this election can make all the difference in the world to her and her family. Let's prove her right.

As a country, we have a moral obligation to give her family and every family a chance to rise up and reach their dreams. That is what's at stake in this election. It's not about golf course promotions or birth certificate. It comes down to who will fight for the forgotten, who will invest in our children, and who will really have your back in the White House.

We need ideas, not insults, real plans to help struggling Americans in communities that have been left out and left behind, not prejudice and paranoia. We can't let Barack Obama's legacy fall into the hands of someone who doesn't understand that, whose dangerous and divisive vision for our country will drag us backwards. Instead, we need to come together, to get incomes rising with a higher minimum wage, to invest in neglected communities with efforts like Jim Clyburn's 10-20-30 plan, to get guns out of the hands of dangerous people, to fight for a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice, and to make sure that all kids have good schools and good teachers no matter what zip codes they live in.

When you really think about it, the choice this November is about so much more than Democrats and Republicans. As Michelle Obama said at the Democratic convention, it's about who will have the power to shape our children for the next four years of their lives. It's also about the kind of country we want to be, what we want to leave behind for future generations. I thank everyone here, who has been fighting for this vision over so many years. I thank all who have supported me. I want you to know I'm not taking your vote or anyone's vote for granted. I'm working every single day to earn your support. And I need your help over the next 52 days to bring our campaign across the finish line together.

Barbara Jordan famously said that a government is invigorated when each of us is willing to participate in shaping the future of this nation. So to everyone here tonight, please, keep doing what you're doing, but also help to register voters. Tell others about the clear choice in this election. In some states, early voting is nearly here, so we need to keep the pressure on. Let's send a loud and clear message once and for all: We are stronger together. And no matter what, remember this: Love trumps hate. Thank you all very much!"

"Thank you. Thank you, Temple! I am so delighted to be here with all of you. I saw how much fun President Obama had last week and -- I wanted to be here in Philadelphia.

Before I begin with my remarks, I do want to say how proud I am of our brave first responders working to keep us safe after the attacks of the last weekend in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota. There are now reports of a suspect in custody, but we must remain vigilant. This is a fast-moving situation and a sobering reminder that we need steady leadership in a dangerous world.

I'm here to talk about a number of the issues that are part of this election but really, much more than that, they are part of our future -- the kind of country we want to have, the kind of people we want to be and, particularly, what kind of opportunities we should be providing for the young people of America. I have a proud Owl on my staff, Jamira Burley. A Philadelphia native who became an activist working to end the epidemic of gun violence right here in Philadelphia. She loves Temple and we love her. And I also want to thank Lauren for that introduction.

Jamira and Lauren are two examples of why I do have so much faith in our future. Your generation is the most inclusive, progressive and entrepreneurial that we've ever seen. And as you heard, when Lauren was in college, she saw challenges facing students of color, but there was no NAACP chapter to support them and promote diversity and inclusion on campus -- so she started one. And Lauren remains committed and engaged, working with an organization called Generation Progress, because she understands that active citizenship is a lifelong job and the call to service never fades.

Now, I know that with so much negativity out there, it is really easy to get cynical -- especially about our politics. I remember wrestling with that challenge when I was a student during the Vietnam War. It can be tempting to think that no one will tell you the truth and nothing's ever going to change. But you're here today because you refuse to accept cynicism. You know that the next 50 days will shape the next 50 years. And you see how much needs fixing in our country, from the soaring cost of college to the scourge of systemic racism to the threat from climate change -- but you also know the only way we can meet those challenges is if we meet them together.

You're here today because you believe we can do just that. You want something to vote for, not just against. Optimism, not resentment. Answers, not anger. Ideas, not insults. Bridges, not walls. You're also here because you know this election isn't a reality TV show. It shouldn't be about birth certificates or name-calling or stunts to get onto cable news.

This election comes down to a choice between two very different visions for America. I believe it's wrong to tear each down. We should be lifting each other up. It's wrong to let income inequality get even worse. We have to make the economy work for everyone, not just those at the top. And it's wrong to put a loose cannon in charge who could start another war. We should work with our allies to keep us safe.

It comes down to this: Are we going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides in this country, or are we going to be, as I know we can, stronger together?

I know what I believe, and I'm going to close my campaign the same way I started my career -- fighting for kids and young people and families. That has been the cause of my life. And it will be the passion of my presidency, and I hope you'll join me. We can't get distracted when the media or my opponent turns this election into a circus. My husband has a saying about that. He calls it majoring in the minors -- getting so wrapped up in stuff that doesn't matter, you forget what's really important to your future and to the future of this country.

Take the challenges facing young Americans today. First of all, if you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job that pays well and lets you do what you love and make your mark in the world. But that's been out of reach for too many young people -- trying to find your footing in the wake of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to work with both parties and make a historic investment in good new jobs. We can create millions of jobs and make life a lot better by doing things like connecting every household to broadband by 2020; installing half a billion solar panels; building a cleaner, more resilient electric grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country.

Next, getting an education should give you a boost, not hold you back. But as you know better than most, tuition keeps going through the roof and debt keeps piling up. I understand that Temple was founded to democratize, diversify and widen the reach of higher education. That is still a vital goal.

So I worked with Bernie Sanders on a plan. We came up with a plan that makes public college tuition-free for working families and debt-free for everyone. And if you already have debt, we will help you refinance it and pay it back as a percentage of your income so you're never on the hook for more than you can afford. You can actually see how much you and your family can save under our plan by looking at the College Calculator at hillaryclinton.com.

And here's something we don't talk about enough: a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America. People should be able to learn a skill, practice a trade, and making a good living because of that. So we're offering new tax credits to encourage companies to offer paid apprenticeships that let you earn while you learn and do more to dignify skills across the board -- for welders, machinists, health technicians, coders, and so many other fields.

Another challenge I hear about all the time is from new parents about how hard it is to balance the demands of work and family in today's economy. Families look different today than they did decades ago, I think we can all agree. Most need two incomes just to get by. And many people now change jobs frequently and have wildly unpredictable schedules, or they have to cobble together part-time work, all without the basic supports available to parents in nearly every other advanced country.

That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to help working families with quality, affordable childcare, preschool and paid family leave. We fundamentally believe -- the more we can strengthen families, the stronger we will be as a nation.

Everywhere I go, young people also share their concerns about the divisiveness and discrimination we see in America today. You aren't -- and you shouldn't be -- satisfied with the progress we've made. You should keep wanting to right wrongs and fight for justice and dignify for all. We see, as Lauren said, too many young black men and women made to feel like their lives are disposable; too many immigrants living in fear of deportation; too many young LGBT Americans bullied; too many young women and men sexually assaulted on campus or in the military or at home. And more than previous generations, you understand that all these challenges are intersecting, and we must take them on together.

But you also see a Republican nominee for president who incites hatred and violence like we've never seen before in any campaign. Hate speech being normalized. The dog whistles are out in the open. And yet, despite this, I remain convinced America's best days are ahead of us. In large part, that's because of the inspiring young people I meet every day.

I'm inspired by Astrid. I met her in Las Vegas last summer. She was brought to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll, a cross, and the dress she was wearing. Now she's in her twenties and advocating for the rights of undocumented Americans and comprehensive immigration reform. We should all join her in this.

I'm inspired by Mikey, who I met in New York. Mikey spent six months in prison for a low-level drug offense. After he got out, Mikey discovered just how hard it is for people who've done their time to find good jobs and opportunities. But he persisted, and he managed to start his own ice cream shop in New York -- and I can recommend, it's delicious. We have to do more to help others get that second chance, including by banning the box and reforming our criminal justice system.

I'm inspired by Erica, one of the bravest young women I've ever met. Her mother, Dawn, was the principal of Sandy Hook School who died trying to protect her students. Erica was devastated. But then, she made it her mission to advocate for commonsense gun safety reforms. It's been painful for her -- a lot of hate has come her way and the gun lobby is so powerful -- but Erica won't give up. As she said, "What if everyone who faced tough odds said, it's hard, so I'm going to walk away? That's not the type of world I want to live in.'

That's the spirit that makes this country great -- we might get knocked down, but we get right back up again. And we refuse to quit, no matter what. And that's the spirit we need in this election too.

Now, I know that with Washington paralyzed by big money and partisanship, the gap between the change we want and the progress that politics should deliver can look like a chasm. I also know that even if you're totally opposed to Donald Trump, you may still have some questions about me. I get that. And I want to do my best to answer those questions.

When it comes to public service, the "service' part has always easier for me than the "public' part. I will never be the showman my opponent is -- and you know what, that's okay with me. And it's also true I do spend a lot of time on the details of policy, like the precise interest rate on your student loans, right down to the decimal. But that's because it's not a detail for you. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president.

So here's what I ask any voter who is still undecided: Give us both a fair hearing. Hold us accountable for our ideas, both of us. I can't promise you'll agree with me all the time, but I can promise you this: No one will work harder to make your life better. I will never stop, no matter how tough it gets. In fact, you can read about what Tim and I want to do. We're not keeping it a secret. We've got a book called "Stronger Together.'

But let me tell you a little bit about the values that drive me and my vision for the future because you deserve that from anyone from anyone running for president. I want to share with you the stories of three women who at pivotal moments changed my life and set me on a course of social justice, activism, and public service.

The first woman is my mother. Her name was Dorothy, and she was abandoned by her parents as a young girl. She ended up out on her own at 14, working as a housemaid. When I learned about this many years later, I asked how she managed to grow up into a warm, loving person and not become bitter and broken. And here's what she said, one word: "kindness.' She was saved by the kindness of others. Like the teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and brought extra food to share. The lesson she passed on to me was simple but powerful: No one gets through life alone. We have to look out for each other and lift each other up. She made sure I learned the words of one of the creeds of our Methodist faith: Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can as long as ever you can.

That mission guides me still today. When I stumble, it helps pick me up, because there's always more good to do and more people to help if we keep our eyes open, especially kids.

When I met a terrified little girl in Nevada who burst into tears because she worried her parents would be deported, it hit me right in the gut. I knew how hard-working her parents were. I knew the sacrifices they were making so that she could have a better life. When I met a little boy in Flint, Michigan who got sick from drinking water poisoned with lead, it just made me so angry and determined to work even harder. Every one of our children deserves the chance to share in the promise of America.

The second woman I want to tell you about is Marian Wright Edelman. She was a lawyer for the NAACP in Mississippi, first African American woman to pass the Mississippi bar. She was an ally of Dr. King and Robert Kennedy, and the founder of the Children's Defense Fund, an altogether remarkable person. One day during my first semester in law school, I saw a flyer -- we used to have those, flyers on a campus bulletin board. And Marian was coming to give a lecture. I made sure to be there, and what I heard was captivating. Marian talked about creating a Head Start program in Mississippi and using her legal education to make life better for poor children and families. Something just clicked in my brain. I began to see how I could translate the commitment to helping others I'd learned from my mother, my church, into real social change. I went up to her and I said, "Could I work for you this summer?' She said, "Sure, but I can't pay you.' I said, "Well, I am paying my way through law school, so I have to get paid.' She said, "Well, if you can figure out how to get paid, you can have a job.' So I figured out how to get a grant to get paid and went to work for her.

After graduation, I could have followed my classmates to a high-powered law firm, but I went to work for Marian at the Children's Defense Fund instead. She sent me door to door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school back then. And I remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted an education, but it just didn't seem possible. My heart went out to her and I wanted to help. But it became clear to me that simply caring is not enough. That wouldn't force the public school to build more wheelchair ramps or put more resources into special education. I learned that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. So we gathered evidence. We built a coalition. And our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. And that experience turned me into a lifelong advocate for children and families.

I went to South Carolina to investigate the plight of 12- and 13-year-old boys imprisoned alongside grown men who had committed serious felonies. In Alabama I helped expose the racism of segregated academies. In Arkansas I ran a legal aid clinic that provided representation to poor families and prison inmates who could not afford it. When Bill was elected President, a lot of people were surprised, and even threatened, by the idea of an activist as First Lady. But I wasn't about to quit then, either. I fought for universal health care, and ended up working with Republicans and Democrats in Congress to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which covers eight million kids today.

The third woman who changed my life was named Sophia, the 17-year-old captain of a high school basketball team in New York City. It was the late 1990s, and Democrats in New York were urging me to run for the Senate, and I kept telling them no. After all, no First Lady had ever done anything like that. I myself hadn't run for anything since student council. I'd always been an advocate, not a politician. But then one day I visited that school in New York for an event with young women athletes with Billie Jean King. Hanging above our heads was a big banner that said, "Dare to compete.' Before my speech, Sophia introduced me. She was tall, and as we shook hands, she bent over and whispered in my ear, "Dare to compete, Mrs. Clinton. Dare to compete.' Once again, something just clicked. For years I had been telling young women to step up. Participate. Go for what you believe in. Could it be I was afraid to do something I had urge so many others to do?

Well, it was a difficult transition, becoming a candidate for the first time back in that New York Senate race. Even all these years later, I confess I don't enjoy doing some of the things that come naturally to most politicians, like talking about myself. But I took that leap then for the same reason I'm running now, to even the odds for those who've got the odds stacked against them, especially children and families. And I've learned that in a democracy, if you want to help the greatest number of people, you have to push for reform from both the outside in and the inside out. We need activists and advocates, entrepreneurs and innovators, teachers and mentors, people who change lives every day in a million quiet ways. We also need strong, principled leaders who can win votes, write laws, allocate resources, and do the slow, hard business of governing.

Now, of course, politics can be discouraging. This election in particularly can be downright depressing sometimes. But it matters. It really does. It matters for our families, our communities, and our country and the world. Our most cherished values are at stake. Every election is important, from school board to state senate to president. But this time is different. We are facing a candidate with a long history of racial discrimination in his businesses, who retweets white supremacists, who led the birther movement to delegitimize our first black President, and he's still lying about it today. He refuses to apologize to President Obama, his family, and the American people. We have to stand up to this hate. We cannot let it go on.

And when we do that, we send a clear message: America is better than this. America is better than Donald Trump. Just as important, we have a chance to make real progress together in our country. I need you. I need you as partners, not just for winning this election, but for driving real change over the next four years. The fights ahead of us are bigger than one election, one president, or even one generation. It's going to take all of us working side-by-side to build the kind of future we want. That's why, if I'm in the White House, young people will always have a seat at any table where any decision is being made.

So if you believe diversity is America's strength, not America's burden, join us. If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage and no one working full-time should have to raise their children in poverty, join us. If you believe that climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying clean energy jobs, join us. If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable, quality health care, join us. If you believe we should finally guarantee equal pay for women, join us.

And here's how you can join us. Go to iwillvote.com and register today. Register your friends. Register everyone you know. This is going to be close. We need everyone off the sidelines. Not voting is not an option. That just plays into Trump's hands. It really does. Text "join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246 right now, or go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. I understand here at Temple you're already organizing campaign tailgates at every football game and having a lot of fun doing it. We have 50 days, 50 days, to reach everybody we possibly can, to not only win an election -- that's just the first step -- then to keep the progress going, go even further, make it absolutely clear that we're going to shape a future that represents the best of who we are. So talk to your classmates. Talk to your neighbors. Help us stand up for our best values and reject prejudice and paranoia.

You know, I mentioned my mother and the kindness she experienced. Her life was so neglected that when she went to work as that housekeeper/babysitter at the age of 14, it was the first time she ever saw a family that loved each other, where the parents loved their children, cared for them, planned for them, where she learned the lessons that enabled her to be such an extraordinary mother to me and my brothers. Everything I've learned in my life convinces me that love trumps hate.

So please join us in working together. There's no doubt in my mind that young people have more at stake in this election than any other age group. And when you turn out and vote this fall, we will be sending a message much larger than even the outcome. We will say we can build a future where all our children have the opportunity to live up to their God-given potential, no matter who they are, where they're from, what they look like, or who they love. That's the America we believe in. That's the America worth fighting for. That's what we've got to do to stand together. We are stronger together, and let's make sure love trumps hate. Thank you all!"

"Thank you. Thank you all. Hello, everyone. It's great to be here at UNC Greensboro. I want to thank Martha for that wonderful introduction. It means so much to have her here along with her wonderful daughter, Sara, and her mother, Barbara. And the story she told is really one that motivates me every day because it is kids like Sara that led me to politics in the first place to try to make our country and our world better for them. So to see Sara grown up and thriving is very special, and your whole family's support really means the world to me. Thank you, Martha, Sara, Barbara.

I have to say it's great to be back on the campaign trail. As you may know, I recently had a cough that turned out to be pneumonia. I tried to power through it, but even I had to admit that maybe a few days of rest would do me good. And I'm not great at taking it easy, even under ordinary circumstances. But with just two months to go until Election Day? Sitting at home was pretty much the last place I wanted to be.

But it turns out having a few days to myself was actually a gift. I talked with some old friends. I spent time with our very sweet dogs. I did some thinking. The campaign trail doesn't really encourage reflection, and it's important to sit with your thoughts every now and then. And that did help me reconnect with what this whole campaign is about.

People like me -- we're lucky. When I'm under the weather -- now, I just want to have a conversation, and other people can wave their arms and their signs. But I want you to think with me for a minute about how I certainly feel lucky. When I'm under the weather, I can afford to take a few days off. Millions of Americans can't. They either go to work sick, or they lose a paycheck, don't they?

Lots of Americans still don't even have insurance, or they do but it's too expensive for them to actually use. So they toss back some Tylenols, they chug orange juice, and they hope that the cough or the virus goes away on its own.

Lots of working parents can't afford childcare, which in many states costs as much as college tuition. So for millions of moms and dads, if they get sick, there's no backup. They're on their own, aren't they?

That's the story for too many people still in America. When illness strikes, or an accident happens, you feel you're on your own. If you lose your job or can't afford college, you're on your own. If your aging parent starts needing more help, and you don't know what to do, you're on your own.

Life events like these are catastrophic for some families, but mere bumps in the road for others. I have met so many people living on a razor's edge, one illness away from losing their job, one paycheck away from losing their home. And that goes against everything we stand for as Americans. Because some things should not come down to luck. Some things should be within reach for everyone, no matter what. Like financial security. Like affordable health care. Like the peace of mind that comes with knowing that if something goes wrong, your family will be okay. And above all, the knowledge that no matter what, your president is fighting for you and will always have your back.

That right there, that's why I got into this race. I am running for everyone working hard to support their families, everyone who's been knocked down but gets back up. The factory workers on their feet all day, and the nurses looking after patients all night. I'm running for young people like so many of you here, who dream of changing our world for the better, and for all the parents and grandparents supporting those dreams by dedicating every dollar they can spare to your education.

I'm running for the LGBT teenager here in North Carolina who sees your governor sign a bill legalizing discrimination and suddenly feels like a second-class citizen. And if anyone wonders what the costs of discrimination are, just ask the people and businesses of North Carolina. Look at what's happening with the NCAA and the ACC. This is where bigotry leads, and we can't afford it -- not here, not anywhere else in America.

I'm running for women like Janelle Turner. Back in May of last year, Janelle was diagnosed with breast cancer. She went through nearly six months of very tough treatments. Last October, she brought her eight-year-old daughter to one of our rallies in Iowa and they made a huge sign that read, "Thirteenth chemo yesterday. Three more. Hear me roar!' Wouldn't you want to meet the woman behind that sign? Well, I sure did. So we got talking, and we've stayed in touch. She keeps promising me she'll see me at the inauguration. And I tell her I'll keep working to get there, but she'd better be there too.

I'm running for her and all the mothers and fathers trying to get and stay healthy so they can be there for their kids. But perhaps most of all, I'm running for those kids. Standing up for children has been the work of my life. As a lawyer with the Children's Defense Fund, as First Lady in Arkansas, in the White House, as a Senator, I have fought for kids housed in adult jails, kids who have been neglected and abused, kids who couldn't get health insurance because of pre-existing conditions, kids with disabilities so they could go to school. You heard today from someone I've known for a long time, now grown up and a lovely young woman, Anastasia Somoza. I learned from my family and my Methodist faith that we are each called to do all the good we can for all the people we can for however long we can. And to me, that means making sure all our children have the chance to live up to their God-given potentials.

So when I meet a little girl in Nevada terrified that her parents are going to be deported, it hits me right in the gut. When I meet a little boy in Flint, Michigan, who can't drink the water at home or in school because it's poisoned with lead, that gets me going. All I want to do is get to work making things better for them.

That's why I care so much about national security too. I want to give our kids a safer world. To me, that means a world with strong allies, more friends, fewer enemies, and fewer nuclear weapons. It also means leading the fight against climate change so we can leave our kids a health planet.

My opponent in this race disagrees with me on every one of these fronts. Just a few days ago he said that if another country's troops taunted ours -- not fired at them, but taunted them, just taunts -- he'd responded -- he would respond by blowing them out of the water. He would start a war over that. That is just one more reason, my friends, why the stakes in this election are as high as any in our lifetimes.

I've been involved in politics in one way or another for many years. It is not an easy business. It can get rough and I've built up some defenses. When it comes to public service, I'm better at the "service' part than the "public' part. But this is why I do it, and this is who I'm in it for: to make life better for children and families. And that's what this race has always been about for me.

Well, now we're in the final stretch. There are just 54 days till Election Day. Just 54 days till the most consequential vote of our lifetimes. And just a little more than a month until early voting starts here in North Carolina. Let's make these days count, particularly here, because you know what your governor and legislature tried to do -- make it harder for young people to vote, harder for people of color, harder for people with disabilities, harder for the elderly. There can't be any more motivation than that to make sure every young person, every person of color, every person with a disability, every older person turns out and votes.

So in these final days, let's try to tune out all the chatter and the nonstop analysis that doesn't often have much to do with what the next president has to do to create good jobs, to create opportunity, to make it possible for every young person to afford to go to college or get the skills that you need for the jobs of the future. Let's talk about what really matters.

And here's my promise to you. I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career and the way I will serve as your president should you give me that great honor -- focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families.

Next week, I'll go to Philadelphia to talk about challenges facing our young people; in Florida, to focus on building an economy that welcomes everyone's contributions, including people with disabilities; then I'll be back here in North Carolina, to meet with more working families. From now until November 8th, everywhere I go, I'm going to talk about my ideas for our country. My campaign has rolled out detailed plans in 38 different policy areas -- yes, somebody actually counted. Everything from reining in Wall Street to creating good-paying jobs to fighting Alzheimer's to supporting people with autism. You see, I have this old-fashioned notion that if you're running for president, you should say what you plan to do, how you're going to get it done, and how you're going to pay for it. You can read it all on my website, hillaryclinton.com. We even put it in a new book called, you guessed it, Stronger Together. Get a copy of it because it tells you everything Tim Kaine and I intend to do.

Now, like a lot of women, I have a tendency to over-prepare. I sweat the details, whether we're talking about the exact level of lead in the water in Flint, or how many North Carolina kids are in early enrichment programs, or the precise interest rate on your student loans right down to the decimal. Because you know what? It's not a detail if it's your kid. It's not a detail if it's your family. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president.

Now, I confess, I'll never be the showman my opponent is, and that's okay with me. Just look at -- look at the show he put on with Dr. Oz today. But I am going to deliver for you and your family, just like I did for Sarah all those years ago with the Children's Health Insurance Program, that gave her the chance to be the extraordinary young woman she is. And I'll tell you something else. People accuse me of all kinds of things. You probably have seen that. But nobody ever accuses me of quitting. And I will never give up, I'll never walk away, no matter how tough the going gets. I'm actually asking Americans to hold me accountable for my ideas and hold my opponent accountable for his.

We don't need a president who says the minimum wage is too high. We need a president who knows that Americans deserve a raise to get to a living wage. We don't need a president who wants to take away people's health coverage. We need a president who wants everyone to have quality, affordable health care. And we don't need a president who apparently thinks only married people deserve paid leave and only mothers stay home with kids. We don't need someone who rushes out a half-baked plan just weeks before an election after decades of ignoring or putting down working moms. We need a president who has spent years fighting for these issues, who has a plan to support all families in all their various shapes. Ask yourself which candidate you can count on to be on your side, respect your family, stand up and fight for you and your kids.

That is who you should vote for on November 8th because as Michelle Obama said in her fabulous speech at the Democratic convention, when we go to the polls this November, the real choice isn't between Democrat or Republican. It's about who will have the power to shape our children for the next four years of their lives. It's also about the kind of country we want to be and what we want to leave behind for future generations. People have to decide, are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just those at the top? Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart? Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe, or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything generations of Americans have worked so hard to build?

Now, I have a lot of confidence in the American people and in our country. My opponent keeps running us down, saying we're weak, a disaster, an embarrassment. Every time he says things like that, I think about Janelle and her strength in the face of cancer, or Martha and Sarah in the face of their health challenges, and that little boy in Flint, who gets up every day and goes to school even though he can't drink the water. See, my opponent has America all wrong. There's nothing we can't do when we come together as one nation, set big goals, and pursue them.

And the American dream -- the American dream is big enough for everyone to share in its promise. So if you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage, that no one who works full-time should have to raise their child in poverty, join us. If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable health care and women should be free to make our own health decisions, join us. If you believe -- if you believe your working mother, wife, sister, or daughter deserves equal pay, then join us. Get involved these last 55 days. Go to hillaryclinton.com or text "join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246. We need volunteers right here in North Carolina. We can't do this without you.

And remember, the presidential race isn't the only one this fall. We've got a lot of important statewide races. Let's come together and send Deborah Ross to represent the people in the Senate. Starting on October 20th, you can register and vote early at the same time at any one-stop early voting site in your county. So the heat is on. Spread the word. Tell your friends, your family, your neighbors. If you share our vision for America's future, come be part of helping us shape it. We do not have a minute to lose.

We have so many blessings. Now it's our job to deliver on those and to make sure every single person, and particularly every child, no matter who they are, what they look like, or who they love, is part of the American dream now and way into the future. Let that be our message. Let that be our mission. Please come out and help us fight, fight for you, fight for our children, fight for our families. Let's make America all that it should be. Thank you and God bless you!"

"Hello, B-W-A. I thank you all for that warm welcome. There's nowhere I'd rather be than right here with all of you this morning.

Please everyone be seated. This is such a great opportunity to lift up the work that so many of you have done for years -- your organizations, individually -- and I am grateful for it because it has helped to guide me in a lot of the work that I've been privileged to do.

I want to thank Gwen Hess for her introduction. I want to acknowledge, it's always great to see a woman serve as president in any setting.

I want to congratulate today's honorees. Everyone is so deserving of this recognition. I also want to acknowledge a few others. We have some fierce members of Congress with us today, women whom I admire, who have been my colleagues and friends and with whom I am looking forward to continuing our work: Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, Congresswoman Gwen Moore, Congresswoman Yvette Clarke, Congresswoman Stacey Plaskett.

And I want to give a special shout out to Congresswoman Joyce Beatty. When I saw Joyce recently, she said, "Well, you are coming, aren't you?' And I said, "I'm working hard to get it set.' And I am so proud that it did work out, and I thank Joyce for that extra push.

I also want to acknowledge someone who had such a profound effect on my life, in every way, someone whom I admire and love, Marian Wright Edelman. This audience is filled with longtime friends and people I went to Wellesley College with that became life-long friends to me, and so many of you who have been on the front lines -- everyone associated with The Black Women's Agenda, I'm thrilled to be with you. I'm thrilled to be associated with you. I'm also thrilled to be back on the campaign trail. As the world knows, I was a little under the weather recently. The good news is, my pneumonia finally got some Republicans interested in women's health.

Looking back, I know, I should have followed my doctor's orders to rest, but, my instinct was to push through it. That is what women do every single day, and I felt no different. Life has shown us that we do have to work harder at the office while still bearing most of the responsibilities at home -- that we always need to keep going because our families and our communities count on us. And I think it is more than fair to say, that black women have an even tougher road.

And you, your daughters, your granddaughters -- I was pleased to meet Gwen's beautiful granddaughter earlier -- leave the house every morning, put on that game face that we all practice, and enter a society that consistently challenges your worth. With the images you see, the lower pay that so many take home, that try to silence your voices and break your spirits; yet, you remain fierce in the face of these challenges. We see that every day in the businesses you start, the art you create, the children you teach and the communities and organizations you lead. While your stories are often missing from the history books -- make no mistake -- you are the change makers, the path breakers, and the ground shakers. And, you are proof that yes, indeed, black girl magic is real.

Now, I've been blessed to see this magic's influence on kids and communities up close for decades, starting with my first job after law school working with Marian at the Children's Defense Fund. Marian's belief was that every single child had worth and potential and deserved the opportunity to live up to their god potential with the tools and the support that every child needs. And that if we just improve the odds a bit for those suffering in poverty, they could flourish. So she led our team into some very poor communities. We met kids who had dropped out of school because they couldn't afford textbooks or transportation. Some didn't have decent clothes and stayed home to avoid being humiliated in class. Some had untreated medical and dental problems that made it practically impossible for them to learn. Those stories really hurt my heart.

But Marian always believed we could deliver help and hope if we never ever gave up. So she taught us ways to think creatively, as well as strategically-- to take our advocacy and turn it into action and results. She sent me to New Bedford, Massachusetts, to go door to door looking for children who weren't in school. That was back before we had a legal requirement that every child, regardless of disability, deserved to get an education. I met a young girl in New Bedford and sat and talked with her on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted to learn, but couldn't because schools weren't accessible or welcoming. So Marian had us get to work and change that.

We gathered evidence and built a coalition. We helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. Marian showed me that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. You need both understanding and action. And there is no question, I'm here today because of her example. I also want to recognize pioneers like Barbara Jordan and Shirley Chisholm, who sacrificed and struggled so that I and so many other women running for office could soar. I'm here because of friends and colleagues, like Donna Brazile, Reverend Leah Daugherty and Congresswoman Marcia Fudge -- three black women who ran the Democratic National Convention in July. It was a great four days.

It goes to show that black women deserve more than a seat at the table. It's past time you had a fair chance to run the meeting. And let's be clear: I would not be the Democratic nominee for President of the United States were it not for black women like all of you who made noise at the polls this year in support of our campaign -- who did surrogate events, went to barber shops and beauty salons and cafes, got on local radio and local TV to make the case. We've come far together.

And as I said yesterday in North Carolina, I'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career all those years ago at the Children's Defense Fund, and the way that I will serve as your president should I have the great honor of being elected: I will be focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families. The American people deserve something to vote for, not just against.

And together -- together, we are going to make this a freer, fairer and stronger nation.

We're going to fight for the parents struggling to balance family and work and push for affordable child care, paid family leave, and yes, finally, equal pay for women.

We'll fight for the young girls who want a fair chance in life, which is why we'll make universal pre-k available so that every child -- no matter what they look like or where they live -- can rise up and be prepared to fulfill their academic destiny.

We are also going to do a lot to emphasize STEM education, particularly for girls and women, and I thank the agenda for making that a priority!

We'll fight for the entrepreneur who said that more businesses die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else, which is why we're going to increase access to capital, and we are going to help African American women continue to represent the fastest growing segment of women-owned businesses in America right now.

We are going to invest in communities that have been left out and left behind. Urban reinvestment and restructuring that is going to give more people decent housing, access to jobs, the transportation to get to those jobs, rural communities that are too often ignored and denied the services they need. I am a fan of Jim Clyburn's "10-20-30' plan. I am going to do everything I can to push that forward.

We'll remember the pain of the Mothers of the Movement and fight for a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice and a future where everyone has respect for the law and is respected by the law. And we are going to pass common-sense reforms to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people and keep our communities safe.

We'll remember the families neglected in Flint and take action so that no child's life is ever put at risk again when brushing their teeth or drinking a glass of water at dinner. We'll advocate for everyone concerned about their parents and grandparents as they age, and lift up caregivers and home care workers so older Americans can live in comfort and with dignity.

And we're going to protect and enhance Social Security, which is the main source of income for older women. We'll stand-by-side to make sure that all of our rights are respected and protected -- civil rights and women's rights, LGBT rights, worker's rights and, of course, voting rights.

We are coming together at a pivotal moment for our country. Now I do believe that every election is important. But this one feels different, doesn't it? That's because it is. The next 53 days will shape the next 50 years. The future of our children and grandchildren hangs in the balance.

On one hand, we have my opponent, Donald Trump, and in recent weeks, he's tried to restrain himself and clean up his image. But as Maya Angelou once said, "When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time.' And we know who Donald is. For five years, he has led the birther movement to de-legitimize our first black president. His campaign was founded on this outrageous lie. There is no erasing it in history.

Just yesterday, Trump again refused to say with his own words that the president was born in the United States. Donald's advisors had the temerity to say, "He's doing the country a "service' by pushing these lies.' No, he isn't. He's feeding into the worst impulses -- the bigotry and bias -- that lurks in our country.

Barack Obama was born in America, plain and simple. And Donald Trump owes him and the American people an apology. So, my friends, there is no "new' Donald Trump. There never will be. Donald Trump looks at President Obama after eight years as our president. He still doesn't see him as an American.

Think of how dangerous that is. Imagine a person in the Oval Office who traffics in conspiracy theories and refuses to let them go -- no matter what the facts are. Imagine someone who distorts the truth to fit a very narrow view of the world. Imagine a president who sees someone who doesn't look like him, and doesn't agree with him, and thinks, "That person must not be a real American.'

Donald Trump is unfit to be President of the United States. We cannot become insensitive to what he says and what he stirs up. We can't just accept this.We've got to stand up to it. If we don't, it won't stop.

In addition to the president, Donald Trump looks at a distinguished federal judge, born in Indiana, and he sees a Mexican, not an American. He looks at a Gold Star family and sees them as Muslims, not patriotic Americans. He looks at women and decides how our looks rate on a scale of one to 10. I look at America, I see everyone. I see our great diversity, which is one of our core strengths, not our burden. We know who Donald Trump is. Now it's time for our country to show who we are and reject his divisive vision.

That's why this election is so important. As Michelle Obama said at the Democratic Convention, "When we go to the polls this November, the real choice isn't between a Democrat or Republican.' It's about who will have the power to shape our children's lives for the next four years. It's also about the kind of country we want to be, and what we want to leave behind for future generations.

We are at our best when every person gets to share in our nation's promise, contribute to its progress. "Stronger Together' is not just our campaign slogan. It's the guiding principle for the future we need to build. So Americans, we need to ask themselves: Are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just for those at the top? Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart? Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything that generations of Americans have worked so hard to build?

Now in many ways, the profound choice is up to the women in this room. African American women turned out to vote more than any other group of Americans in 2012. This year, once again, you have your hands on the wheel of history and you can write the next chapter of the American story.

Keep up the great work with your Four for 4' campaign. Make sure we get as many people registered and then to the polls as we possibly can. People say to me all time, "I just -- I don't know what to do about Trump and his supporters and the things he says and inciting violence and all of the terrible activities that are happening this election year.'

Well, here's what we can do. Let's reject the cynicism, the bullying, the divisive rhetoric that my opponent uses to make us afraid of each other, afraid of our differences, afraid of our future. I know that all of us in this room are ready to stand up against this  to rise up for our families, our communities, but most importantly, to show up at the polls this November.

With our power and strength, I know -- I believe this, or I would not be standing here before you, I would not have run again for president, I would not deal with all the incoming brickbats that are hurled my way if I did not in my heart believe with every fiber of my being that together we can build a future where, yes, love trumps hate.

Thank you very much. Thank you."
Hello! Hello, CHCI! It is so great to be back here with so many friends and to see so many young people here because that fits the theme this year: educate, engage, vote. And I can't think of better marching orders for the next 54 days. [Cheers.] And anyone who just heard the congresswoman knows we cannot be on the sidelines. This is the most consequential election in our lifetimes.

I want to recognize the Institute for all you do to inspire the next generation of Latino leaders. Last year, I had the chance to spend time with some of the CHCI interns and fellows. It really was like seeing the future of America in one room. I can't wait to see everything that they achieve. And I can't wait, if I'm fortunate enough to be president, to put some of them to work!

And I want to thank all my friends in the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. You fight every single day to lift up the Latino community -- when the cameras are rolling and when the cameras are off, at home in your districts and here in Washington. And no one understands better than you the pivotal moment we're at right now -- not just for Latinos but for our country.

My friends in the caucus have traveled to every battleground state, registered voters. You've stayed focused no matter what kind of outlandish and offensive comments we have heard from my opponent and his supporters. By the way, I personally think a taco truck on every corner sounds absolutely delicious.

Now, here's a confession: Running for president is never easy, but it shouldn't be, right? But tonight I have the ultimate challenge: speaking after President Obama. He's always a tough act to follow, in more ways than one.

I, for one, don't think the President gets the credit he deserves for rescuing our economy from another Great Depression. Think of what we've achieved these last eight years. American businesses have created 15 million new jobs since the recession. Twenty million Americans have health coverage -- and no one has seen a bigger drop in uninsured rates under the Affordable Care Act than Latino Americans. We got more good news this week. A report came out showing that poverty is going down, and incomes for American families are going up, and Latino families have seen the biggest increase of all.

Now, that doesn't mean we rest on our laurels by any stretch. Our work is far from finished. But I am more confident than ever that our best days are still ahead of us. I believe with all my heart that the American Dream is alive and it's big enough for everyone to share its promise. That doesn't mean that lots of people are still not hurting, because I know they are. And when you hear a presidential candidate spewing bigotry and hate, it's easy to get discouraged. But we're here because we know this election is a choice between not just two people but two very different visions for our America's future.

Either we're going to make our economy work for everyone, or just those at the top.

Either we're going to fear our differences, or embrace and celebrate our diversity.

Either we're going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides, or we're going to be stronger together.

Today, as you know, we're in the midst of Hispanic Heritage Month. In classrooms across America, children will study Dolores Huerta and Cesar Chavez, Julián and Joaquín Castro, Justice Sotomayor, Roberto Clemente and Laurie Hernandez, Gloria Estefan and Lin-Manuel Miranda, and countless others -- names we know and names we might not know, but every one of whom has enriched this country for generations.

Whether you're Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Latin American, Afro-Latino, whether your family just arrived or has been here since before the United States even existed [cheers], you're not strangers. You're not intruders. You're our neighbors, our colleagues, our friends, our families. You make our nation stronger, smarter, more creative. And I want you to know that I see you and I am with you, and time and again -- time and again we have seen that when we invest in the community, when we make it possible for Latinos to get the health care you need, get the education you desire, compete for jobs, start new businesses, pursue your dreams, all of America benefits.

As I said this afternoon in North Carolina, we are in the final stretch of this election. And I intend to close my campaign the way I began my career, fighting for kids and families. That's been the cause of my life. It will be the passion of my presidency. So tonight I want to mention two things I'll do in the first 100 days of my administration to help families in every corner of America.

First, we do need to create an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. There's something wrong when Latinos are 17 percent of our country's population but hold only 2 percent of its wealth. We've got to work together to connect more Latinos with good jobs that pay good wages, with more opportunities to get the skills they need, to go to college, to launch new ventures, to build wealth that can be passed on to your kids and your grandkids. So we're going to make, in my first 100 days, the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II, jobs in infrastructure, manufacturing, technology, innovative, clean energy.

And we're going to cut red tape and taxes and expand access to capital for small businesses, including the Latino-owned small businesses that create so many jobs and so much growth in communities everywhere. And I want to give a particular shout-out to Latina small business owners. Not everyone knows this, but you are among the fastest-growing group of entrepreneurs in America. And we're going to put families first with new solutions that reflect the way people live and work today. Supporting families with paid family leave, earned sick days, and affordable childcare isn't a luxury, it's a necessity. When families are strong, America is strong.

And that brings me to another important family issue. In those first 100 days, I will send a proposal for comprehensive immigration reform to the Congress. My proposal will keep families together, and it will include a path to citizenship. Now, I know this isn't the first time you've heard it. In fact, people have been making the same promise for more than a decade. But I believe with all my heart that some things are too important to give up on. I've been called a lot of things; I've never been called a quitter.

And in this election -- in this election, we have a chance to show that comprehensive immigration reform isn't just the smart thing to do, it's what the American people demand. And you know how we'll show that? Well, I hope to have a Democratic Congress next January. [Cheers.] But no matter what, on my first day in office I will reach out to Republicans and say, this is your chance to help millions of families and show that your party, the party of Lincoln, is better than Donald Trump.

And while we're fighting for comprehensive immigration reform, we're going to keep families together. When the deadlocked Supreme Court put DAPA and expanded DACA on hold for 5 million immigrants, it was devastating to millions of families. But the court didn't actually rule on the substance of the case. And as I've said repeatedly, I believe DAPA and expanded DACA are squarely within the President's authority, and will I protect them and keep fighting for them.

But in addition to defending DAPA and DACA, there's more we can do. We need a simple, straightforward system where other people with sympathetic cases who are contributing to their communities can make their case and be eligible for deferred action too. Like people who experience and report extreme labor abuses. And we won't stop there. We're going to end family detention, close private detention facilities, and stop the raids and roundups. No child should have to say goodbye to their parents every morning not knowing if their mom or dad will be there when they get home.

So here's the bottom line. Comprehensive immigration reform will not only be the right thing to do, but it will add $700 billion to our economy and enable America to be what it's always been -- a place where people from around the world can come to reunite with family, start new businesses, pursue their dreams, apply their talents to American growth and innovation.

Now, I know this has been a long road and we wouldn't be where we are today without your persistence and the quiet courage of families in every state of our union, and we certainly wouldn't be here without the bravery of the young men and women who have risked their very place in the United States by coming forward and fighting for their own future and the future of millions of others. They helped change the conversation. And when President Obama created DACA, it changed their lives.

Right now, 750,000 undocumented young people in America are going to school, working, and planning for their future. They're DREAMers in much more than name. I've met so many. I've listened to their stories. They've done everything we've asked of them and made our country stronger in return.

So when Donald Trump promises to rip that all away on Day One, when he promises to round up and deport all of the 16 million people living and working among us, including American citizen children who were born here to parents who are undocumented, these are the faces I see.

I picture Astrid Silva -- who I met in Las Vegas. Many of you know her story: She came to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll, a cross, and the dress she was wearing. Now she's in her 20s, advocating for the rights of everywhere.

I picture a young man I never met, whose high school teacher wrote me a few months ago to share his story. His teacher told me that his former student was funny, enthusiastic, and patriotic. He played the drums in the school marching band and after graduation in 2005, proudly enlisted in the U.S. Army. Before shipping off to Iraq, he stopped by the school so everyone could see him in his new uniform.

He was, his teacher wrote, "as respectful and optimistic as any student who ever entered my classroom.' He was also a DREAMer, brought here as an undocumented child. He loved America, and hoped one day to earn his citizenship. But in April 2007, while on a mission in Baghdad, he was killed by an improvised explosive device. He was just 19. The Army called him a hero and he was posthumously granted the American citizenship he'd always wanted.

All these years later -- his teacher still treasures his memory. And this teacher wanted me to know -- he wanted me to know that despite what Donald Trump may say, immigrants are not rapists and criminals. The truth is, this young man may not have been born here, but he represented the best values of our country.

We teach our children that America is one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way, but for all. Everywhere I go, people tell me how concerned they are by the extreme policies and divisive rhetoric they've heard from my opponent -- from the racist lie about Mexican immigrants that launched his presidential campaign to his racist attacks on a federal judge.

And every time we think he's hit rock bottom, he sinks even lower. His latest target? A minister in Flint, Michigan who respectfully asked him not to use her pulpit for political attacks. He called her a nervous mess.

How insulting, how dead wrong. Reverend Faith Green Timmons is not a nervous mess -- she's a rock for her community in trying times, and she deserves better and so does America. And again today, he did it again. He was asked one more time, "Where was President Obama born?' And he still wouldn't still say "Hawaii.' He still wouldn't say "America.' This man wants to be our next president? When will he stop this ugliness, this bigotry?

Now, he's tried to reset himself and his campaign many times. This is the best he can do. This is who he is. And so we need to decide who we are. If we just sigh and shake our heads and accept this, then what does that tell our kids about who we are? We need to stand up and repudiate this divisive rhetoric. We need to stop him conclusively in November in an election that sends a message that even he can hear. We need to set the kind of example we want for ourselves and our children and our grandchildren

Parents and teachers are already worried about what they're calling the "Trump Effect.' Bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools, especially targeting students of color, Muslims, and immigrants.

At a high school basket game in Indiana, white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of "Build the wall' and "Speak English.'

Donald Trump is running the most divisive campaigns of our lifetimes. His message is you should be afraid -- afraid of people whose race or ethnicity is different, or whose religious faith is different, or who were born in a different country. There's no innuendo or dog whistles anymore. It's all right out there in the open now. So we've got to come back twice as strong and twice as clear.

Just this week, a mother in Florida wrote to me about her 11-year-old son, Francisco. He's proud to be American, Colombian, Ecuadorian, and Puerto Rican. As he calls it, a "potluck' of Hispanic heritage. And Francisco has been following this election very closely, his mother told me. He wears his "Love Trumps Hate' pin every day and refuses to take it off. When his father warned him that might make him a target for bullies, Francisco looked his father in the eye and he said: "I was always told to stand up for myself and what I believe in. And I believe Trump is wrong.' And good for you, Francisco.

That's what we have to do in this election, and that's what so many of you are doing already: standing up to the bullying and bigotry wherever it comes from.

Together, we must send this resounding message, and we need to inspire a level of turnout that will help us win up and down the ticket.

We've set an ambitious goal of registering and committing 3 million people to vote in this election that would not have otherwise voted, and we can't do it without you. Nearly half of Latinos in America are under 35, and we need you to show up and make your voices heard in this election.

So we're going to keep asking for your help. Keep hitting the campaign trail. Please talk to your friends, your neighbors, your community -- everyone you see between now and November 8th. Tell them to go to hillaryclinton.com, or text JOIN, J-O-I-N to 47246 to get involved. This election is too important for anyone to sit on the sidelines, as we heard from Congresswoman Sanchez.

So let's stand up for a future where we put families first. Where we build bridges, not walls.

And yes, together we can prove love trumps hate. Thank you all very much."

Thank you all so much. Wow. Thank you. Thank you. It's sort of like the seventh inning stretch. Thank you all. You know, I've been saying at events like this lately, I am all that stands between you and the apocalypse. Tonight, I'm all that stands between a much better outcome! I want to thank Laverne for being here at her first political event. Her endorsement, her strong words, her passion, her example, her advocacy on behalf of the transgender community, particularly transgender women of color, is just so extraordinary, and I love the way she wove in so many of the issues that are up for grabs in this election.

I think we know what we're up against. We do, don't we?

[Crowd chants: Yes!]

Donald Trump has pledged for appoint Supreme Court justices who will overturn marriage equality--

[boos]

And if you have read about the ones he says he's likely to support, he's not kidding. In fact, if you look at his running mate, his running-mate signed a law that would have allowed businesses to discriminate against LGBT Americans. And there's so much more than I find deplorable in his campaign: the way that he cozies up to white supremacist, makes racist attacks, calls women pigs, mocks people with disabilities -- you can't make this up. He wants to round up and deport 16 million people, calls our military a disaster. And every day he says something else which I find so personally offensive, but also dangerous. You know, the idea of our country is so rooted in continuing progress that we make together. Our campaign slogan is not just words. We really do believe that we are stronger together. We really do believe that showing respect and appreciation for one another lifts us all up.

And it's a special commitment that I feel to continuing to fight alongside the LGBT community. Because this is one of the continuing struggles. We're filled in this great hall in Cipriani tonight with successful people, raising your glow sticks, thank you so much for contributing a little bit more to get the campaign over the finish line. But somewhere right now in this city is a kid has been kicked out of his house. Somewhere not far from here, maybe a suburb or across state lines, is a young girl who is just not sure what her future holds because she just doesn't feel like she's herself and no one understands that. Some kid getting off the bus at the Port Authority and somebody's waiting to take advantage of that scared but brave kid looking for a different life and a future that actually belongs to him or her.

We still have a lot of work to do. And if you think of the work we have to do in our own country, it pales in comparison to the word we have to do around the world. And I'm grateful that in this room are so many people who have broken down barriers, stood up to discrimination and bigotry, fought for the rights of everyone. I was in North Carolina just yesterday and I told them, it's not only that discrimination is wrong. It's bad for business. That state which was led down a pathway of discrimination is seeing the results -- losing jobs, losing the NBA all star game. Who wants to be associated with a governor and a legislation who set out to hurt the people they're supported to be representing and protecting?

[Cheers]

In too many places still, LGBT Americans are singled out for harassment and violence. You can get married on Saturday, post your pictures on Sunday, and get fired on Monday. That's why we've got to continue the forward march of progress.

And we cannot do it alone. I cannot do it alone. I'm not like Donald Trump who says "I alone can fix it.' I've never quire figure out what it is he alone can fix.

[Laughter/cheers]

But that's not what you'll hear from me. I think we have to do this together. So, together we're gonna pass the Equality Act to guarantee full equality. We're going to put comprehensive quality affordable health care within reach for more people, including for mental health and addiction. We're gonna take on youth homelessness, and as my wonderful, extraordinary, great daughter said, we are going to end the cruel and dangerous practice of conversion therapy. We're going to keep working toward an AIDS-free generation, a goal that I set as secretary of state, and with your help we're going to pass comprehensive gun laws

[HILL-A-RY chants]

I know there are only 60 days left to make our case -- and don't get complacent, don't see the latest outrageous, offensive, inappropriate comment and think well he's done this time. We are living in a volatile political environment. You know, to just be grossly generalistic, you could put half of Trump's supporters into what I call the basket of deplorables. Right?

[Laughter/applause]

The racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic -- you name it. And unfortunately there are people like that. And he has lifted them up. He has given voice to their websites that used to only have 11,000 people -- now how 11 million. He tweets and retweets their offensive hateful mean-spirited rhetoric. Now, some of those folks -- they are irredeemable, but thankfully they are not America. But the other basket -- and I know this because I see friends from all over America here -- I see friends from Florida and Georgia and South Carolina and Texas -- as well as, you know, New York and California -- but that other basket of people are people who feel that the government has let them down, the economy has let them down, nobody cares about them, nobody worries about what happens to their lives and their futures, and they're just desperate for change. It doesn't really even matter where it comes from. They don't buy everything he says, but he seems to hold out some hope that their lives will be different. They won't wake up and see their jobs disappear, lose a kid to heroine, feel like they're in a dead-end. Those are people we have to understand and empathize with as well.

[Applause]

And what I hope is that in addition to your extraordinary generosity, you will go to our website, hillaryclinton.com, or text join to JOIN at 47246 to see how else you can get involved.

And I want to echo what Chelsea said. We are trying to register 3 million more voters and get those voters to commit to vote. We will win if people turn out to vote. There is no doubt in my mind that we will win.

[Cheers]

But we can't take anyone or any place for granted. And therefore I am asking you to volunteer for a phone bank, for a canvas -- at the very least if you know anybody who's even thinking about voting for Trump, stage an intervention! That may be one conversion therapy I endorse.

[Cheers]

Just remember: Friends don't let friends vote for Trump.

So we're going to have a great night tonight because we are so blessed. You know, we all love this woman either from afar or luckily enough up close -- and for my family, it's been up close. We know she's the great talent of our time. We know that remarkably she's had a number one album in each of the last six decades. We know that. But we also feel and see her heart and her passion. And she's of course been a great ally and supporter of the LGBT community -- but of progressive causes and candidates, she's been on the front lines repeatedly, bravely, never giving up or giving in to all of the incoming criticism that any of us who stick our necks out often attract. So we're in for a great treat tonight. I could not be happier, more grateful, or excited, than to introduce a woman of such extraordinary presence, that really just her first name -- spelled correctly -- is more than enough. Please welcome, Barbra Streisand!

"Good evening. This is the day the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it. President Young, pastors, friends, I'm very grateful for this great chance to be with you during your week of convention. I'm especially pleased to see my friend, the mayor of this great city. He is someone who, if you haven't gotten to know, I hope you do. Thank you, Mayor Sly James. I was also delighted to greet, on the way in, the new Jackson County executive, Major League baseball star and all-around good guy Frank White , who has done such an incredible amount of good work on the field and now off the field.

I want to thank all of you -- Dr. Miles, Dr. Brown, all our friends from this city and this state, for hosting us. I want to acknowledge on a personal point Dr. Shaw, celebrating 60 years as pastor of the White Rock Baptist Church. When I saw him tonight, I kidded him and said he started when he was 2. I'm sure there's a law against that, Dr. Shaw. Dr. McKinney, Dr. Brown, all the members of the executive board, and state presidents.

Now, I know that Reverend Jackson was with you on Monday, and Congressman Cleaver was with you on Tuesday. So talk about two tough acts to follow. But they are both dear, longstanding friends of mine. And I am honored to be on this same stage as so many distinguished leaders.

Now, I happen to be a born and raised Methodist, but I've been married to a Southern Baptist for more than 40 years. And from Arkansas to New York -- friends, from Arkansas. John, they've got friends from Arkansas here -- but across this great country, you've welcomed me into your congregations with open arms and open hearts. And I am grateful for the friendship, support, and Christian hospitality I have found there. As pastors, as spouses of pastors, families of pastors, you know better than anyone the importance of building relationships of trust and respect. And I am sure some of you are sick and tired of politicians who think they can just show up at election time, say a few nice words, and then earn your support. Right?

Well, you and your congregations deserve better than that. You deserve a sustained commitment to expanding opportunity, equity, and justice, not just for two or four years, not just when the cameras are on and people are watching, but every single day. And you know better than anyone that people who look at the African American community and see only poverty, crime, and despair are missing so much. They're missing the vibrancy of black-owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities. They're missing the success of black leaders in every field, and the passion of a new generation of young black activists. And yes, they are missing the strength of the black church, the solid rock on which so much is built.

Well, I see you. I see the work you do and the lives you change. And today I want to say something that you don't hear often enough: Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for answering the charge given to us by Jesus, as Matthew records, to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the sick, welcome the stranger. Thank you for loving all people, especially the least, the last, and the lost among us.

And you know so well we're not asked to love each other, not urged or requested. We are commanded to love. Indeed, Jesus made it his greatest commandment. When I used to teach the occasional Sunday School class, I often taught on that lesson. That's a hard commandment to obey. Some days it's really hard for me. But in so many ways, all of you have answered that call.

I've been privileged to see your love in action with my own eyes. I've seen the love at Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Pastor Damian Epps and his congregation collected tens of thousands of water bottles to send to families in Flint, Michigan suffering from water poisoned with lead. Because they remembered that eight years before, when the Mississippi River rose up and flooded Eastern Iowa, others came to their aid. As Pastor Epps said, they are fellow Americans. They are human beings. We should want to reach out and help. And he's right. That ethic is at the core of our Christian faith. And we all have work together to make sure every child in America has clean water to drink, clean air to breathe, and good schools, no matter what zip code they live in.

I've seen the love at Tabernacle Community Baptist Church in Milwaukee. Reverend Don Darius Butler has helped organize gun buy-back programs because none of us can sit back while the epidemic of gun violence ravages our communities and our country. It is, as you know, by far the leading cause of death for young black men, more than the next nine causes of death combined. And I promise you this: As president, I'll stand with you in the fight for common-sense gun safety reforms.

I've seen the love at the Triumph Baptist Church in Philadelphia where Reverend James Hall, guided by what he calls the three E's of evangelism, education, and economic development, has been led to set up a credit union to help people in the community overlooked or ignored by the banks so they can get a small business loan, save for college, or put something away for retirement. They've helped build a supermarket in a neighborhood that hadn't seen one in more than 10 years. And they're reaching out beyond the pews to help families live safe, healthy, prosperous lives.

I've seen the love at Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama. It was an honor to join Reverend Cromwell Handy and his congregation last December to celebrate the 60th anniversary of Rosa Parks' courageous action against segregation.

And by the way, Rosa Parks may have opened up every seat on the bus; now it's our job to create good jobs so everyone can afford the fare and they can actually get bus routes to reach every neighborhood that connects them with safe, affordable housing and good jobs.

As president, I will be your partner in this work of translating love into action. Together we'll make transformative investments in communities that have been left out and left behind for far too long -- from our neglected inner cities to struggling rural communities.

We'll work with both parties to make the biggest investment in good new jobs since World War II, including $20 billion to tackle the challenge of youth unemployment, which is twice as high for young African Americans as it is for young white Americans.

We'll "ban the box," and do more to help people who've paid their debt to society find jobs and housing when they get out.

And we will embrace Congressman Jim Clyburn's "10-20-30" plan -- steering 10 percent of federal investments to neighborhoods where 20 percent of the population has been living below the poverty line for 30 years. That's a great idea whose time has come, and we can translate it into reality.

Together, we'll face head-on systemic racism and work to reform our criminal justice system from end-to-end. Because everyone in every community should have respect for the law and be respected by the law.

We'll beat back the assault on voting rights. It is a blast from the Jim Crow past that must be stopped. We should be expanding voting rights instead.

The best way to stand up to those who are trying to prevent any person from exercising his or her vote is to register and show up and vote against them and make sure your vote counts loudly and clearly.

There's so much we can do if we keep love in our hearts as we do the noble work of breaking down barriers that hold Americans back.

Now, as you well know, we're in the final stretch of an election that may be the most consequential of our lifetimes -- an election in which all of these issues and so many more are at stake. Our nation's values are being questioned in this election.

We are facing a candidate with a long history of racial discrimination in his business -- -- who traffics in toxic conspiracy theories like the lie that President Obama is not a true American.

If he doesn't even respect all Americans, how can he serve all Americans?

So we must keep calling him out and rejecting the hateful, bigoted rhetoric that seeks to pit Americans one against each other, and continue making the case in every way for our vision of an America that is "stronger together." An America where all our children have the choice to live up to their God-given potential, no matter where they come from, or what they look like, or what the circumstances of their lives have been.

I have laid out my vision and my agenda. In fact, Senator Kaine and I have just published a book called "Stronger Together" that lays it out clearly so you know what you're voting for, not just against. And we're going to get the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top; how we're going to have more jobs and infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean renewable energy; how we're going to do more to help small businesses. The fastest-growing segment of small business in America today are small businesses started by African American women. I want to be a small business president to help everyone willing to take the chance. And we're going to make the economy fairer. We are going to raise the national minimum wage. No one who works full time should be mired in poverty at the end of a long, hard year.

And yes, we are finally going to guarantee equal pay for women's work so that we raise family incomes and provide the respect that comes from being paid what you are entitled to earn. And we're going to make education work for every child -- early childhood education, universal prekindergarten. I want to bring technical education back into high school. It was a mistake when we took all of that vocational education out of our high schools. I want every young person who wants to go to college to be able to go to college, but I want every young person who wants to do a good day's work in a job that builds America -- the machinists, the tool and die makers, the computer coders -- I want them to feel they are just as welcome and wanted. And we're going to make college affordable for everybody. And I have a $25 billion plan specifically focused on historically black colleges and universities that served our nation and provide the leaders of the next generation.

And we're going to help you pay down your student debt. It is way past time. And let's make sure health care is free -- is available, affordable, of high quality for everybody. And we've got to get the cost of prescription drugs down and we have to do more to help with mental health and addiction, two problems I hear about across our country, which I know you hear about in your churches.

So we have a lot of work to do, and we're going to keep working to earn every vote and never take any community or any person for granted. Tim Kaine and I have launched a nationwide drive to register and commit 3 million Americans to vote by Election Day, and I hope you will be part of it. This election is too important for anyone to sit on the sidelines.

Today, for a few minutes, I want to leave aside the politics and do something that doesn't always come naturally to a Midwestern Methodist; that is, to talk about my own faith, how it led me to a life of service, how it will guide me as president. Sometimes people ask me, "Are you a praying person?" And I tell me if I wasn't one before -- whoo, one week living in the White House or on the campaign trail would have turned me into a praying person.

But I had the great blessing to be raised by a family and a church that instilled in me a deep and abiding Christian faith and practice. I still remember my late father -- a gruff former Navy man -- on his knees praying by his bed every night. That made a big impression on me as a young girl, seeing him humble himself before God.

My mother taught Sunday school in our church, partly she said because she wanted to make sure that my brothers actually showed up at Sunday school when they walked out the door. Her faith was rooted in gratitude for the love that helped her survive a painful childhood after her own family abandoned and mistreated her. She was sustained by the kindness of others, like the first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and brought extra food to share.

My mother was determined to pay that kindness forward. And she really liked the Wesleyan credo of our church, "Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can, as long as ever you can." I was also so blessed to have a remarkable youth minister who believed, like John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, that the world is my parish. He told us -- these young white kids in a suburban area of Chicago -- you can't just be satisfied in your own church, in your own middle-class life; we're going into the inner city of Chicago, we're going into church basements for fellowship with young people your age from African American churches and Hispanic churches. That was the first time I was in a black church, when I was a teenager.

He took us to hear Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., speak. He sent home the permission slips whether we could get in the church van to go into Chicago on a Sunday night to hear Dr. King, and some of the parents wouldn't let their kids go. My mother said this is a historic opportunity. I remember, remember hearing Dr. King preach one of those well-known sermons, staying awake during the revolution, and then I stood in line with everybody in that big hall just to shake his hand and look into his eye.

His words, the power of his example, affected me deeply and added to the lessons of my minister to face the world as it is, not as we might want it to be, but to commit ourselves to turning it into what it should be.

So thanks to my family and my church, I embraced an activist social justice faith, a roll-up-your-sleeves and get-your-hands-dirty faith. As St. Francis of Assisi reportedly advised, "Try to preach the gospel always, and if necessary use words." The scripture tells us that faith without works is dead. The Epistle of James tells us we cannot just be hearers of the Word, we must be doers. And I believe that with all my heart. I am grateful for the gift of personal salvation and for the great obligation of a social gospel. To use the gift of grace wisely, to reflect the love of God and follow the example of Jesus Christ to the greater good of God's beloved community.

That's what led me to devote my life in the ways that I could to serving others, especially children. I went to work right out of law school for the great Marian Wright Edelman the daughter of a Baptist minister from Bennettsville, South Carolina, and the founder of the Children's Defense Fund. She sent me door to door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who weren't able at that time to attend public school, to South Carolina to investigate the plight of 12 and 13-year-old boys imprisoned alongside grown men who had committed serious felonies, and to Alabama to expose the racism of segregated academies. I went undercover to Alabama all by myself. Marian just said, "Well, you just have to go do it." And I did.

Now, it would have been easier and certainly more remunerative to follow many of my law school classmates to a high-powered New York law firm, but the call to service rooted in my faith was just too powerful. For me, it has always been about trying to live up to the responsibility described by the Prophet Micah that we do justice, love kindness, and walk humbly with our God.

Humility is not something you hear much about in politics, is it? But we should. None of us is perfect. St. Paul reminds us we all see through a glass darkly and for now only know in part. It's because of that, because of the limitations we all face, that faith requires a leap, the conviction of things unseen. It's because of our limitations and imperfections that we must reach out beyond ourselves, to God and to each other. It isn't easy, but I have learned to be grateful not just for my blessings but also for my faults -- and there are plenty! I've made my share of mistakes. I don't know anyone who hasn't. Everyone here today has stumbled on their own stony paths. It's grace that lifts us up, and grace that leads us home.

But it's also our job to learn from our mistakes; to do all we can to do better next time, and to stay grateful. To live by the "discipline of gratitude." Our Christian faith is a journey that never ends. It's a constant challenge to live up to our own hopes and ideals. To love and forgive others as we want to be loved and forgiven ourselves. You know, as President Obama reminded us, seeking high office is, by definition, an act of audacity. And yet, our greatest leaders are often the most humble. Because they recognize both the awesome responsibilities of power and the frailties of human action.

I've sat in the Situation Room with President Obama, weighing conflicting advice and imperfect information, wrestling with the hardest choices a leader can make: whether to send our young men and women into harm's way, knowing that some of them will never return. There's nothing more humbling than that. Nothing that should drive you to your knees more than that. That's why in this time of both peril and promise, we need a President who understands that none of us has all the answers and no one person can fix our problems alone. A President who understands we have to look out for each other and lift each other up, not tear each other down.

That's what we need to do together: invest in our people, believe in each other, create the jobs and the schools and the opportunities for young people, so that they believe that we care about them. Send our children to schools that reflect their promise, not our neglect. Make sure every child is given the healthcare he or she needs, whether it is for an ailment of the body or the mind. Stand ready to lift each other up when we fall, as we will. Give those who have made mistakes a second, third chance. Our faith is a faith of second and third and fourth and fifth chances for those who genuinely are seeking redemption.

And we need a President who understands the powerful role that faith -- and communities of faith -- have always played in moving our country toward justice, from the abolitionists of the 19th century, to the civil rights movement of the 20th century, to the unfinished business of today. A President who will pray with you, and for you, who will defend the dignity of every individual, and the principle of religious freedom that was woven into the moral fabric of our nation from the very beginning. Yes, we need a President who will do justice, love kindness, and walk humbly with our God.

My friends, one of the greatest privileges of this campaign has been getting to know a remarkable group of women who've lost children to gun violence or police incidents. They're known as the Mothers of the Movement, and their hearts may be broken, but their souls shine thorough. I'll never forget listening to Gwen Carr, the mother of Eric Garner, describe the mission these mothers feel called to lead. We were at the Central Baptist Church in Columbia, South Carolina, pastored by Reverend Ricky Ray Ezell, Sr.

I wish you all could have heard her -- Gwen was as eloquent as any preacher. She recalled the pain of losing her son. She said, at first, she couldn't even get out of bed. But then, she said, "The Lord talked to me, and told me, "Are you going to lay here and die like your son, or are you going to get up and uplift his name?'" She realized in that moment that none of us can rest as long as there are others out there to be saved. And that her voice could move people to action. And then the said this: "I had to turn my sorrow into a strategy, my mourning into a movement,"

Gwen hasn't stopped working since, bringing more and more allies to the cause of peace and justice. Because she knows, in a way, that tragedy and profound loss can teach us that we are stronger together than we could ever be alone. Gwen and the other Mothers of the Movement are living what the Scripture tells us: "Let us not grow weary in doing good, for in due season, we shall reap, if we do not lose heart." Those are words we all should live by. And if I have the great honor of serving as your President, these are words that I will lead by. Thank you all and may God bless you."

"Hello! Whoa, it is so great to be here. Thank you all so much. And I was backstage listening to Jordan Polk's story, and it was just so powerful and moving, and her ability to stand up here, talk about her personal family experience, coming out of Katrina, staying strong, moving forward, being a student here at Johnson C. Smith University. I am so excited.

I want to thank her and I want to thank Dr. Carter. Thank you for welcoming us here. You have welcomed two Clintons in the last year. There's something about this place that has attracted both my husband and myself. I apologize for being late. We had a disabled airplane on the runway that had to get moved. It took a lot longer than expected. But I've been looking forward to joining all of you here in Charlotte.

I want to recognize and thank your mayor, Mayor Jennifer Roberts. There you are. Thank you, Mayor Roberts. I want to thank Trevor Fuller, chair of the Mecklenburg County Commission. I want to acknowledge Josh Stein, candidate for attorney general. And to all of you gathered here today.

It is 61 days until the election. And I think it's so appropriate to be here in the great state of North Carolina -- -- at a really well-renowned H -- you know what I'm saying? -- HBCU, historically black college and university. That, like so many others, has played such an important role in our country's history, producing some of America's finest leaders. And I am very proud. I was just doing a phone call on the way here with a lot of my young organizers on college campuses across our country, and I got a question from a young woman at another historical black college and university -- Fayetteville. And I told her that I have a plan to help all of you afford to go to college. I have a plan to help all of you with student debt to pay it down and pay it off. And I have a special plan of a $25 billion fund specifically aimed at supporting HBCUs. Because we need a lot of opportunities for young people from everywhere. It shouldn't matter what you look like, where you're from, or who you love. You deserve to be in college if that is your choice.

So right now we're up and running, we're organizing across America, and as Jordan said, this election has such high stakes, but the highest stakes are for young people. Young people across America. This election is going to determine in so many ways what kind of futures you will have. I don't say that lightly. Everybody always says every election is important, and I happen to believe that. I think it's one of the great gifts of our democracy that we have the opportunity to choose our leaders. And people -- brave people -- going back for so many years have fought to preserve that right. And that right is under attack right now, and it is under attack in North Carolina, of all places, a state that often set the standard for moving everybody into the future, and I admired that so much -- emphasis on education from literally preschool through college; emphasis on research; emphasis on job creation and innovation. And now North Carolina, under the current governor and legislature, has been trying to restrict people's right to vote. Well, you know it. North Carolina voters, though, won an important victory when a federal court just struck down this state's voter ID law. And the federal court brought back more days of what's called one-stop early voting. And here's what the court said -- this is not me talking. This is what the federal court said. The court said the North Carolina law was designed to target African American "with almost surgical precision."

Now, that's not just happening in North Carolina, unfortunately. It's happening across America. And courts have been overturning restrictions that make it harder not just for African Americans but low-income people, Latinos, young people. One of the provisions in the North Carolina law was to make it really hard to vote where you go to school. So this has been a concerted effort to undermine the right to vote, even to make it hard for people with disabilities to cast ballots. Well, what's the best way to repudiate that kind of underhanded, mean-spirited effort to deprive people of their votes? Get out and vote and make it clear we're not putting up with that.

These laws are a blast from the Jim Crow past, and they have no place in 21st century America. We should be doing everything we can to make it easier to vote, not harder. That's why if I'm elected president, I will work to expand early voting. We will enact universal voter registration so every young person in every state is automatically registered to vote when you turn 18. And we will repair the damage done to the Voting Rights Act and take on discrimination in all forms.

Now, HB2 is another example of trying discriminate against people that doesn't have any place in our modern society. You've seen this firsthand in North Carolina. Discrimination is not only wrong, it's bad for business. The NBA, you know, cancelled the game. PayPal cancelled bringing, I think, 400 jobs. Others are not coming to this beautiful state because they don't want to be associated with the discriminatory, bigoted policies of your governor and legislature. Now, one thing you can do about that is change your governor in November. And while you're at it, change one of your Senators. We're going to need reinforcements up in Washington. We got a big agenda.

And people say to me, well, what is it you're going to try to get done? Well, I'll show you real easy. We just published a book. Right? Tim Kaine and I put this book out. It's called "Stronger Together." It's not very long. Not a hard read. But we have this old-fashioned idea that if we're asking you to support us for president, we ought to tell you what we're going to do. Not just bluster. Not just empty words. Not just demagogic rhetoric. Real plans that will improve your lives, make our country safer and better. So you could pick this up.

We're going to build an economy that works for everybody, not just those at the top. Sounds like a good idea. We're going to make the biggest investment in good-paying jobs since World War II -- infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean energy jobs. We're going to make the economy fairer, raise the national minimum wage, get people who work full-time out of poverty. And we are finally going to guarantee equal pay for women's work. It is long overdue.

Did any of you see any of the Democratic convention? Well, I don't know. You might have missed one of my favorite sets of speakers. We had these two young people from Kansas, 17 years old, young man, young woman. I'd read this, and I said, let's contact these young people and find out their story. Here's their story. Seventeen. Had the same summer job. Knew each other, working in a pizza restaurant. And they were pretty excited. I remember when I got my first real job, not babysitting but actually showing up at a job and having to do it.

And so one day, after they finished work, they were talking, and the young woman said, "I think, making $8 an hour, I should be able to at least save something for college." And the young man, a friend of hers, said, "Well, I'm making $8.15 an hour." And she said, "Well, why are you making 15 cents more an hour than I am? Neither of us had any experience to do this job. We're the same age." He said, "Well, I don't know. That doesn't sound right. Maybe there was a mistake." So they go to the manager. They tell the manager. And the manager fired them both. And you know what? That's legal. If you find out you're not being paid the same for doing the same job, you can be fired. So this is not some made-up problem. And this would raise family incomes. And if you have a mother, a wife, a daughter, or a sister who's working, it's your issue. So we're going to get that done as well.

And like I said, we're going to make college affordable for everybody, pay down debt. But we're going to do something else. I think it was a mistake when we got rid of all vocational education in high school. It needed to be improved, don't get me wrong. It wasn't training people for the jobs that were out in the marketplace any more. But we got rid of all of it. We need technical education in high school. We need more apprenticeship programs where young people can learn and earn at the same time. And we're going to go back to emphasizing that in high school, community colleges, apprenticeship programs, creative ideas like coding camps. We're going to have 1.4 million jobs in 2020 for people who have computer science skills, and we're going to only, if we continue on our present path, only have 400,000 Americans prepared to do those jobs. I want those jobs to be American jobs. So we're going to help train people of all ages to be able to do those jobs.

We are also going to defend quality affordable health care for everybody, but we're going to get the costs down. We're going to get the costs of prescription drugs down for sure. And we're going to emphasize two things that we have fallen short on, mental health and addiction services. People I've met here in North Carolina and across America talk to me about that all the time. So again, we've got our ideas in here. We want you to engage with us, give us your ideas. This needs to be an ongoing conversation. We want you to hold us accountable when we're in that White House trying to do all of this.

But we also have to keep America safe. And we have to lead the world with steadiness and strength. One of the biggest differences in this campaign is Donald Trump basically says, "I alone can fix it," we have it is. Think of who that leaves out. That leaves out our troops on the front line. It leaves out our police and fire responders to emergencies. It leaves out our teachers, our educators who are working to help young people. It leaves out everybody. "I alone can fix it"? I was raised to believe that we're in this together, and together we can fix it. And that is exactly what we're going to do.

That's why Tim Kaine and I are running a campaign of issues, not insults. Donald Trump has a different approach. He wants to build an economy that works even better for himself, starting with a $4 billion tax cut for his own family. He's built a career on stiffing workers, mom and pop contractors, small businesses that did jobs for him and the he refused to pay them. I take this very personally. My father was a small businessman. That's how he provided a good middle class living for us.

He printed drapery fabrics. He would get the fabric and roll it out on these big long tables, and you'd take a silkscreen and you'd put it down. You'd dump the paint in. You'd take the squeegee. You'd go across. You'd lift it up. You'd go down to the end of one table, start on the other end of the other table. And you'd do it until the job was done. Sometimes I was there helping him. And then he would load the fabric into his car and he would deliver it. I tell you what, I am so grateful he never had a contract with Donald Trump's businesses.

In fact, I just ran across a story in Las Vegas when I was there a few weeks ago of a small drapery business who got what they thought was the greatest contract ever for Trump's new hotel in Las Vegas. They delivered the goods, and they were refused payment, for no reason other than it's a game to him. Everything is a game. It's like he's living in his own celebrity reality TV program. You know what, Donald? This is real reality. This is real people. This is real decisions that have to be made for our country.

He actually stood on a debate stage and said wages are too high in America. Now, he's got some new advisors. He's had a bunch of advisors. He's got some new advisors. And they're all trying to make him look more presidential. Sound more serious. It's not working too well. But remember what Maya Angelou, who spent the last years of her life right here in this state at Wake Forest, reminded all of us. I think about it often. I was so privileged to know her. When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time.

You know, stronger together also means working with our true allies and partners around the world, and last night I offered some thought about ISIS, Iran, how we're going to reform the VA system to take better care of our vets. And just since last night, when I appeared on that program back-to-back with Trump, just in the last 24 hours, more retired generals and admirals have signed up to support my campaign.

People who have sacrificed and spent their lives protecting our country, valuing what makes us exceptional and already great, see Donald Trump and know he should not be anywhere near the White House. He is temperamentally unfit to be president and commander-in-chief.

Now, tomorrow I will hold a meeting of bipartisan, bipartisan which is what I want to get us back to where Republicans and Democrats work together to make the changes to protect our country. I'm going to be meeting with a bipartisan group of leaders and experts to focus more on these crucial challenges, but it's hard to forget what Trump did last night. It was a test and he failed it. He trash-talked about America's generals saying that they've been quote "reduced to rubble." He suggested he would fire them all and hand-pick his own generals since he knows so much about what it takes to be a general.

He attacked dozens of former flag officers. At the same time, and here's what I want you to really hear, because even I was shocked by this and I didn't know much could shock me coming out of his mouth anymore, he praised Russia's strongman Vladimir Putin, even taking the astonishing step of suggesting he prefers the Russian president to our American president. That is not just unpatriotic, it's not just insulting to the office and the man who holds the office, it is scary; it is dangerous. It actually suggests he will let Putin do what Putin wants and even make excuses for him.

I said this morning -- I was trying to think about what other presidents would be imagining hearing that coming out of the nominee for the Republican Party. What would Ronald Reagan say about a Republican nominee who attacks America's generals and heaps praise on Russia's president?

We've never seen anything like this. And one thing you didn't hear from him was any plan to take on ISIS, one of the biggest threats facing our country. He says his plan is still a secret. Well, the truth is he doesn't have a plan. I served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. I served as Secretary of State as you know. I respect the men and women who put their lives on the line for the country that I love and that I believe in.

So whether you're passionate about more good jobs, better education, healthcare, whether you're passionate about protecting our country and the brave men and women who serve us, you have to realize, as so many Republicans are, that this is a time to put country over party. I would be saying that even if I were not running against him. We have never been threatened as much by a single candidate running for president as we have been in this election.

As your commander-in-chief, I will not trash our country's most cherished values, I will defend them. And that is especially on my mind because this weekend is the 15th anniversary of 9/11. I was a senator serving, and I will never forget the horror of that day or the bravery of our first responders, the victims, the survivors, people I had the honor to work with and represent. It's what kept me really so passionately involved on behalf of the people that I served all during those years.

And that is what I was thinking of 10 years later in the White House Situation Room. I was part of the small group advising President Obama whether or not the intelligence we had was good enough to take a chance to go deep into Pakistan to try to finally bring Osama bin Laden to justice. It was not an easy choice by any means. These never are. That's why who sits at the head of that table in the Situation Room has to be able to sort out fact from opinion, has to be able to ask the hard questions, pursue even the most difficult leads. We went through that hour after hour after hour. And then the President went around the table asking each of us what we advised, and we were split because it was not some kind of easy layup. I believed it was strong enough that we needed to take action, and I supported taking action that would determine whether or not we were successful. That meant sending in Special Forces.

Now, you know what happened. I was in that Situation Room watching that day -- the most stressful 30 minutes of my life probably because you remember one of the helicopters hit its tail on the wall going into the courtyard and became disabled. That meant -- thank goodness there were good contingency plans, but you had to get another helicopter in to take out the SEALs who would no longer be able to fly out on that one. But here's what I want to tell you because it is a story that to me illustrates our values in such a clear, unambiguous way. You've heard Donald Trump say he would order our troops to torture. You've heard him say he would order our troops to kill family members of terrorists. You would know that he was advocating illegal actions against our own laws as well as the laws of war. Thank goodness there's a code of honor in our military stronger than the bluster and the bullying of Donald Trump because here is what happened on that night.

Every single second counted. That helicopter had to be blown up, but before it was -- and remember the SEALs had gone in, they had taken out the two Kuwaitis, the bodyguards, they'd taken out bin Laden's son who was there, and they took out bin Laden. They had to get his body out. They had to get themselves out, but here's what they did first. They rounded up all the women and children, members of terrorist families, they took them outside as far from the helicopter as they could get them in order that they would not be hurt. That, Donald Trump, is what American honor looks like, and that is what we're going to stand up and defend in the face of your outrageous, disgraceful attacks on the men and women of our armed forces.

We're going to unify this country, my friends. We are going to bring us back together. We are going to get things done, big things. That's who we are as Americans. I can't do any of this unless you join me in this campaign. You can start by going to HillaryClinton.com or texting "join," j-o-i-n, to 47246. You can knock on doors. You can make phone calls. Register your friends to vote. Attend a house party in your neighborhood. We're going to keep asking for your help over these next two months. There is so much at stake in North Carolina and in America. No one can sit on the sidelines. The stakes are high for everyone. Join the campaign. Let's build a future where we're stronger together. Thank you."

"Good afternoon! I am delighted to have this great honor of being here and having this opportunity to address you. I want to thank the National Commander; thank you Commander Barnett. I want to thank Verna Jones, your Executive Director, and Dewey Moss, Aide to the National Commander. And I want to thank a long time friend and advisor to me. Someone who I am very grateful to, and that is your National Treasurer, George Buskirk.

Most of all, thanks to you. All the Legionnaires here and across America, most of all thanks to you. Thanks for your service and our armed forces. You wore the uniform, you took an oath, you put your life on the line to protect the greatest country on Earth. Yes.

There are some who may argue with that, but not around me. When you came home, you joined the American Legion, and by doing so, you kept serving. Just look at what the Legion does. You care for wounded warriors, you help raise the next generation of American patriots. I want to give a special shout out to Boys Nation, which meant so much to my husband when he was growing up. And when I told him he was coming here today, he said, "You've got to mention Boys Nation." I told him I would, but I also have to mention Girls Nation too.

I want to thank your auxiliary, the world's largest women's patriotic service organization. . I was honored to receive the Auxiliary's Public Spirit Award in 1997, and I have great admiration for the work that you do. As the daughter of a veteran, as a proud American, I am grateful to you all.

Now I'm not going to talk a lot about politics today, but I do want to say this. Whoever America elects this fall won't just be our next president; that person will be our next Commander-in-Chief. And every person in this room understands how great a responsibility that is.

Now I know some of you are Democrats, and some of you are Republicans and some of you are independents. I suppose there are some of you who have never voted for a Democrat before. I get that. My dad was a Rock-ribbed Republican, but I learned at our dinner table that we can disagree without being disagreeable.

And, I want you to know if I am fortunate enough to win this election, I will be a president for Democrats, Republicans, independents. For people who vote for me, for people who don't. For all Americans. That is what I think we need. We need to unify our country and go forward into the future with confidence and optimism.

Today I want you to know a little bit about where I stand, and how I see the world and America's place in it. I spent four years as your Secretary of State. Eight years before that as senator of the great state of New York, six years on the Senate Armed Services Committee.

If there is one core belief that has guided and inspired me every step of the way, it is this: United States is an exceptional nation. I believe we are still Lincoln's last best hope of earth. We are still Reagan's shining city on a hill. We're still Robert Kennedy's great, unselfish, compassionate country.

And it's not just that we have the greatest military or that our economy is larger than any on earth. It's also the strength of our values. The strength of the American people. Everyone who works harder, dreams bigger and never, ever stops trying to make our country and the world a better place. And part of what makes an exceptional nation is that we are also an indispensable nation. In fact, we are the indispensable nation. People all over the world look to us and follow our lead.

My friends, we are so lucky to be Americans. It is an extraordinary blessing. It's why so many people from so many places want to be Americans too. But it's also a serious responsibility. The decisions we make and the actions we take, even the actions we don't take, affect millions, even billions of lives. You know that, you've seen it.

All this may seem evident, especially to men and women who have worn the uniform. You may wonder how anyone could disagree. But in fact, my opponent in the race has said very clearly that he thinks American exceptionalism is insulting to the rest of the world. In fact, when Vladimir Putin, of all people, criticized American exceptionalism, my opponent agreed with him saying, and I quote, "If you are in Russia, you don't want to hear that America is exceptional." Well maybe you don't want to hear it, but that doesn't mean it's not true.

My opponent misses something important. When we say America is exceptional, it doesn't mean that people from other places don't feel deep national pride just like we do. It means that we recognize America's unique and unparalleled ability to be a force for peace and progress. A champion for freedom and opportunity.

Our power comes with a responsibility to lead. Humbly, thoughtfully, and with a fierce commitment to our values. Because when America fails to lead, we leave a vacuum. It either causes chaos, or other countries or other networks rush in to fill the void. So, no matter how hard it gets, no matter how great the challenge, America must lead. The question is how we lead. What kind of ideas, strategies and tactics we bring to our leadership.

American leadership means standing with our allies. Because our network of allies is part of what makes us exceptional. No other country in the world has alliances like ours. Russia and China have nothing close. We stand with our allies because generations of American troops fought and died to secure those bonds and because they deliver for us everyday. Our allies share intelligence on terrorists. They provide staging areas for our military so we can respond quickly to events on the other side of the world.

Other nations' soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines often fight side by side with ours. Some of you may have served and fought alongside men and women from other countries. You saw them in action. You know how important these bonds are to our security. Threatening to walk away from our alliances, ignoring the importance that they still are to us is not only wrong; it is dangerous. If I'm your president, our friends will always know America will have your back, and we expect you to have ours.

American leadership means bringing the world together to solve global problems, as only we can. United States build the international coalition against ISIS. Now we are working with partners to take back territory and defeat them without getting drawn into a ground war. We brought the world together to impose sanctions on Iran and secure a deal that puts a lid on Iran's nuclear program without firing a single shot. You don't build a coalition by insulting our friends or acting like a loose cannon. You do it by putting in the slow, hard work of building relationships.

Getting countries working together was my job everyday as your Secretary of State. It's more than a photo op. It takes consistency and reliability. Actually it's just like building personal relationships. People have to get to know that they can count on you. That you won't say one thing one day and something totally different the next. And it certainly takes more than trying to make up for a year of insults and insinuations by dropping in on our neighbors for a few hours, then flying home again. That's not how it works.

American leadership means leading with our values in pursuant of our interests in protection of our security. At our best, the United States is the global force for freedom, justice and human dignity. We celebrate our diversity as a source of national strength. Just look at our armed forces, which represent all races, religions, ethnicities and yes, immigrants from other countries, all fighting for the red, white and blue.

We stand up to regimes that abuse human rights. We stand up for religious and ethnic minorities, for women, for people with disabilities. And we comport ourselves with honor. There's no greater proof of than what our Navy SEALs did during the raid to kill Osama bin Laden.

I was deeply honored to be a part of that small group advising the president. I brought to those discussions my experience as a Senator from New York on 9/11. And my commitment to do whatever I could in whatever role I had to bring bin Laden to Justice.

You have all seen the picture of us crowded into the smaller Situation Room and watching the video screen. Every second counted. One of the copters misgauged how high the wall was, around the courtyard clipped the tail getting disabled. It did not stop the SEALs from rushing out, getting into the compound, returning fire against bin Laden's bodyguards taking on his adult son and finally Bin Laden himself.

But the SEALs knew they had to destroy the helicopter before they left. I was holding my breath through the entire operation. Because at any time, Pakistani soldiers could have arrived. This compound was in a military garrison city -- actually the home of their military academy -- so yes, every second counted. But still, our SEALs took the time to move to move the women and children, bin Laden's family members, to safety, before destroying the helicopter. That is what honor looks like. That is America at our best.

Maybe the soldiers of other nations wouldn't have bothered, or maybe they'd have taken revenge on those family members of terrorists. But that is not who we are. And anyone who doesn't understand that doesn't understand what makes our nation great.

And let me say something else about American greatness. There is no question we face real threats and real enemies that we need to confront and defeat. But my opponent is wrong when he says America is no longer great. Consider the record of the last eight years. In 2009, our global economy was collapsing. Osama bin Laden was plotting. We had more than 180,000 troops fighting two wars. Iran was racing toward a nuclear weapon. Many of our allies were less supportive of American leadership than they had been in decades.

Look where are we now. We've pulled the global economy out of free fall thanks to the hard work and sacrifice of the American people. We've re-deployed well over 100,000 troops from Iraq and Afghanistan so they can go home, rest and train for future contingencies. We cut off Iran's path to a nuclear weapon. We convinced Russia to reduce their nuclear weapons arsenal. We protected our ally Israel, and we brought Osama bin Laden to justice.

We did that. We Americans did all that working together across party lines. And there is no question we have more work to do, but let's be clear: We are stronger together. And it will be my goal if I am fortunate enough to be your president, to bring people back together again to set our goals and move forward to achieve them.

I know we can't cozy up to dictators. We have to stand up to them. We can't contain ISIS; we must defeat them, and we will. We will do whatever is necessary for as long as it takes to bring them to justice and end their reign of terror, once and for all.

This election is about how to make things better. Now make no mistake, I believe we do have better days ahead. But, things could also get worse. If more countries get nuclear weapons, if we abandon our allies. If our Commander in Chief orders our military to break the laws and commit torture, or murder terrorists' family members.

That's why it is so critical that we get this right. And let me underscore what I have said throughout this campaign: we must only send our troops into harm's way as a last resort, not a first choice. That must be our bedrock principle.

But we must be able to act decisively on our own when we need to. I completely reject anyone, including my opponent, who calls the American military and I quote, "A disaster." That's an insult to the men and women serving today and all who have served before who put their lives on the line every day. And it's just not true. We do have more work to do to continue to have the strongest, most effective military in the world. I know this is something that matters a great deal to everyone in this room. Here's what we have to do -- we can't lose our military edge.

That means giving the Pentagon the stable, predictable funding it needs to make smart investments. You've heard of the "sequester" -- the arbitrary caps that Congress has imposed on our entire government for the past several years. Now, look I'm all for cutting the fat out of the budget and making sure we stretch our dollars and proud of the fact that when my husband left office we had a balance budget and a surplus. And I hope that someday we can get back to doing that.

But we cannot impose arbitrary limits on something as important as our military. That makes no sense at all. The sequester makes our country less secure. Let's end it and get a budget deal that supports America's military, our families, and our country. And let's make reform a priority, so that the Defense Department spends its budget on the right things.

And by the way, the last thing we need is a president who brings more name-calling and temper tantrums to Washington. We've got to get people listening to each other again, getting both parties actually to work together. Let's modernize our army and marines, our Navy and Air Force, our Coast Guard. We need to respond to evolving threats from states like Russia and China, Iran and North Korea. From networks, criminal and terrorist networks like ISIS. We need a military that is ready and agile so it can meet the full range of threats and operate on short notice on every domain, not just land, sea, air, and space, but also cyber space.

We'll invest in new technologies so new breakthroughs can transform our military, just as stealth, precision weapons, and advanced communications did in the past. We'll make a renewed push to reduce the world's nuclear weapons, because that does make us all safer. And we'll step up our efforts to secure nuclear material around the world, and stop terrorists from acquiring or using weapons of mass destruction.

One of the first things I will do as president is to call for a new Nuclear Posture Review. We have to make sure that America's arsenal is prepared to meet future threats. We'll invest in the next frontier of military engagement -- protecting U.S. interests in outerspace and cyberspace. You've seen reports Russia has hacked into a lot of things. China has hacked into a lot of things. Russia even hacked into the Democratic National Committee, maybe even some state election systems.

So we have got to step up our game. Make sure we are well defended and able to take the fight to those who go after us. As president I will make it clear that the United States will treat cyber attacks just like any other attack. We will be ready with serious political, economic and military responses. And we are going to invest in protecting our governmental networks and national infrastructure. I want us to lead the world in setting the rules of cyberspace. If America doesn't, others will.

So in short, we have to be ready to win today's fights and tomorrow's. But you know that the most important thing isn't the size of our military or the sophistication of our weapons. The most important thing is our people. The men and women who put on the uniform and serve. We need to we need to take a hard look at our military's personal policies to make sure we are doing everything to attract and keep the best and the brightest who volunteer. We need to support not only them, but also their families.

As President, I will never forget the debt we owe to our veterans and your families who also served. I will never, ever disrespect Gold Star families who made who've made the ultimate sacrifice for our nation , or prisoners of war who endured so much in our name. To insult them is just so wrong, and it says a lot about the person doing the insulting.

In the Senate, I worked with Republicans to increase the benefit paid to Gold Star families, to expand access to military health insurance, to make sure all members of the
Guard and Reserves and their families have access to health benefits, whether they are deployed or training at home. I fought successfully to amend the 2007 Defense Appropriations Act, to establish a training program for family caregivers helping loved ones with traumatic brain injuries.

Senator John McCain and I joined forces to personally raise money for a state of the art rehab facility at Brooke Army Medical in San Antonio to help seriously wounded service members coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan. Like you I, I was outraged by the scandals at V.A. hospitals -- people waiting for months or years for wheelchairs and basic medications -- some even dying while waiting for an appointment. I know that you heard from Secretary McDonald and I know how hard he and his team are working. We're going to build a 21st century Department of Veterans Affairs that delivers world-class care, and we are not going to let anyone privatize the V.A.. We're going to reform and strengthen it, not privatize it.

We will ensure access to timely, quality care for all of our veterans, improve care for women who are often underserved, identify and treat all wounds of war, visible and invisible including Agent Orange, Gulf War Syndrome and traumatic brain injury and PTSD. We will end the epidemic of veterans suicides by expanding access to mental health care and fighting the stigma that isolates too many of our veterans from getting the care they need.

I feel passionately about this because I have looked into the eyes of too many family members who have lost their loved one to suicide. That is why just two days ago when I released my plan of mental health services for all Americans, I included a specific section for more help about veterans and their families because we know too many are not getting the help they need right now. We have got to serve them just as they have served us.

We're going to help more veterans looking for jobs -- with expanded tax credits for businesses that hire veterans, more support to veterans who want to start their own businesses, and making it easier for veterans to get credit for the skills they learned while serving. And we're going to crack down on for-profit schools and companies that prey on or discriminate against service members, veterans or military families.
They should be ashamed of themselves, and we're going to hold them accountable.

We will also work closely with the American Legion to clean up and expedite the appeals process. Benefits should be delivered as quickly as possible and appeals should be decided as expeditiously as possible. I thank you for the work you are doing on that.

Now, a lot of what I've mentioned today has support from both Democrats and Republicans. Maintaining our military and caring for our veterans should never be partisan issues. Defending American exceptionalism should always be above politics. But this is not a normal election. The debates are not the normal disagreements between Republicans and Democrats.

So I hope you will listen carefully to what my opponent and I propose. Consider our plans and the values behind them. And after you've given us both a fair hearing, I hope you will join the growing number of Americans -- Democrats, Republicans and independents -- who are supporting our vision for the kind of future we want for our country.

This election shouldn't be about ideology. It's not just about differences over policy. It truly is about who has the experience and the temperament to serve as president and Commander in Chief.

Just three weeks ago, 50 Republican national security experts, who served in prior Republican administrations, wrote a letter saying that they will not vote for Donald Trump, because he would be -- in their words -- "the most reckless President in American history."

By contrast, I am deeply honored to have so many retired military leaders backing me, along with these Republican experts. I'm supported by people on both sides of the aisle and both sides of the debates that have defined our foreign policy for the last 30 years. They know I believe in a bipartisan foreign policy; they know I believe we should be finding ways to bring our country together around national security, our role in the world, our values. They know they can count on me to do that, and what matters to them is that we make the right choice in November.

The stakes this fall are as high as any election in our lifetimes.

So I'm going to keep raising these issues, keep telling people where I stand, laying out plans for what I do if I'm elected. I have to tell you, it is a little bit funny to me. I get criticized for having so many plans. People say, "Oh, there she goes with another plan about mental health, about veterans." Well, I have this old-fashion idea; if I'm asking for your vote for president, I should tell you what I want to do as your president. So yes, I have laid out plans, and I'm going to work my heart out to implement those plans, and if I win this fall, no one will work harder for our troops, our veterans and our military families.

This is personal to me, starting with my dad. His name was Hugh Rodham. He enlisted in the Navy shortly after Pearl Harbor. He became a chief petty officer at Great Lakes, north of Chicago, responsible for training thousands of young sailors before they shipped out to sea, mostly to the Pacific Theater.

After my dad died, I received letters from men who had served under him. I treasure them to this day. My father told me how emotional he got when he accompanied his trainees to the West Coast and saw those young sailors get on board their ships. He knew some of them wouldn't survive. But he believed in their cause. He believed in them. And they went to serve, to protect our country. They knew their country needed them.

Over the course of the last years, I've also had the privilege of working with, helping and supporting so many active duty and retired military members and families, first as First Lady, then as senator, then as Secretary of State. Whenever I would go anywhere representing you and be privileged to meet with the men and women who serve our country, I would sit down, if we had a chance, and hear what was on their minds, shake hands and take pictures, sometimes bring messages back to their loved ones. And I too knew that some of those young men and women wouldn't be coming home either. It's that kind of courage and honor that our men and women in uniform demonstrate every single day.

I will never forget that, and I would expect the American Legion to be my partner in the White House to make sure I never do. You and all our veterans deserve nothing less -- our respect, our thanks, but you also deserve a country that honors your service, not just with words but with deeds.

That's why the American Legion is so critical, working everyday to make sure America lives up to that standard. I will be doing that work right along beside you if I am given the great honor to serve as your president and Commander-in-Chief.

Thank you all. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America."

"Thank you. Thank you so much. I am so thrilled to be back in Reno! Thank you.

I have to say though, I know when I'm back here in Reno, I'm the other Hillary, and I am more than okay with that, because I think your mayor is doing a terrific job. The fact that she herself is a small business woman and really committed to really lifting up Reno and giving everybody in this great city, the biggest little city with a great heart, a chance to get ahead and stay ahead. I could not be more honored than to have her support and endorsement in this race, so thank you.

Let me also thank Dr. Karen Hilersin and others at Truckee Meadows Community College.

I love community colleges and I know something about what this college is doing to give people of all ages, not just young people, a real chance to get the skills and opportunities that everyone in America deserves, so thank you.

Now I have to begin by saying my original plan for this visit was to focus on our agenda to help small businesses and entrepreneurs. This week we proposed new steps to cut red tape and taxes, to make it easier for small businesses to get the credit they need to grow and hire. I want to be a small business president. My father was a small businessman. And I believe that in America, if you can dream it, you should be able to build it.

We'll be talking a lot more small business and about our economic plans in the days and weeks ahead.

But today, here in this community college devoted to opening minds and creating great understanding in this world and the place we live. I want to address something I hear from Americans all over our country. Everywhere I go, people tell me how concerned they are by the divisive rhetoric coming from my opponent in this election. I understand that concern because it's like nothing we've heard before from a nominee for President of the United States from one of our two major parties.

From the start, Donald Trump has built his campaign on prejudice and paranoia. He is taking hate groups mainstream and helping a radical fringe take over the Republican party. His disregard for the values that make our country great is profoundly dangerous.

In just the past week, under the guise of "outreach" to African Americans, Trump has stood up in front of largely white audiences and described black communities in such insulting and ignorant terms. "Poverty. Rejection. Horrible education. No housing. No homes. No ownership. Crime at levels nobody has seen." "Right now," he said, "you walk down the street and get shot." Those are his words.

But when I hear them, I think to myself how sad. Donald Trump misses so much, he doesn't see. This is a man who clearly doesn't know about Black America and doesn't care about Black America.

Donald Trump misses so much. He doesn't see the success of black leaders in every field, the vibrancy of the black-owned businesses, or the strength of the black church. He doesn't see the excellence of historically black colleges and universities or the pride of black parents watching their children thrive. He apparently didn't see Police Chief Brown on television after the murder of five of his officers conducting himself with such dignity.

And he certainly doesn't have any solutions to take on the reality of systemic racism and create more equity and opportunity in communities of color and for every American.

It really does take a lot of nerve to ask people he's ignored and mistreated for decades, "What do you have to lose?" Because the answer is everything.

Now, Trump's lack of knowledge or experience or solutions would be bad enough. But what he's doing here is more sinister. Trump is reinforcing harmful stereotypes and offering a dog whistle to his most hateful supporters.

It's a disturbing preview of what kind of President he'd be.

And that's what I want to make clear today: A man with a long history of racial discrimination, who traffics in dark conspiracy theories drawn from the pages of supermarket tabloids and the far, dark reaches of the internet, should never run our government or command our military. Ask yourself, if he doesn't respect all Americans, how can he serve all Americans?

Now, I know that some people still want to give Trump the benefit of the doubt. They hope that he will eventually reinvent himself -- that there's a kinder, gentler, more responsible Donald Trump waiting in the wings somewhere.

Because after all, it's hard to believe anyone -- let alone a nominee for president -- could really believe all the things he says.

But here's the hard truth, there is no other Donald Trump. This is it.

And Maya Angelou, a great American who I admire very much, she once said: "When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time." Well, throughout his career and this campaign, Donald Trump has shown us exactly who he is. And I think we should believe him.

When he was getting his start in business, he was sued by the Justice Department for refusing to rent apartments to black and Latino tenants. Their applications would be marked with a "C" -- "C" for "colored" -- and then rejected. Three years later, the Justice Department took Trump back to court because he hadn't changed.

And the pattern continued through the decades.

State regulators fined one of Trump's casinos for repeatedly removing black dealers from the floor. No wonder the turnover rate for his minority employees was way above average.

And let's not forget that Trump first gained political prominence leading the charge for the so-called "Birthers." He promoted the racist lie that President Obama is not really an American citizen -- part of a sustained effort to delegitimize America's first black President.

In 2015, Trump launched his own campaign for President with another racist lie. He described Mexican immigrants as rapists and criminals. And he accused the Mexican government of actively sending them across the border. None of that is true.

Oh, and by the way, by the way, Mexico's not paying for his wall either. If he ever tries to get it built, the American taxpayer will pay for it. We'll be stuck with the bill.

But there has been a steady stream of bigotry coming from him.

We all remember when Trump said a distinguished federal judge born in Indiana couldn't be trusted to do his job because, quote, "He's a Mexican." Think about that. The man who today is the standard bearer of the Republican Party said a federal judge, who by the way, had a distinguished career, who had to go into hiding because Mexican drug gangs were after him, who has Mexican heritage but who just like me was born in this country, is somehow incapable solely because of his heritage. Even the Republican Speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, described that as "the textbook definition of a racist comment."

To this day, Trump has never apologized to Judge Curiel.

But for Trump, that is just par for the course.

This is someone who retweets white supremacists online, like the user who goes by the name "white-genocide-TM." Trump took this fringe bigot with a few dozen followers and spread his message to 11 million people.

His campaign famously posted an anti-Semitic image -- a Star of David imposed over a sea of dollar bills -- that first appeared on white supremacist websites.

The Trump campaign has also selected a prominent white nationalist leader as a delegate in California. And they only dropped him under pressure.

When asked in a nationally televised interview whether he would disavow the support of David Duke, a former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, Trump wouldn't do it. Only later, again under mounting pressure, did he backtrack.

And when Trump was asked about anti-Semitic slurs and death threats coming from his supporters, he refused to condemn them.

Through it all, he has continued pushing discredited conspiracy theories with racist undertones.

You remember, he said that thousands of American Muslims in New Jersey cheered the 9/11 attacks. They didn't.

He suggested that Senator Ted Cruz's father was involved in the Kennedy assassination. Perhaps in Trump's mind, because Mr. Cruz was a Cuban immigrant, he must have had something to do with it. And there is absolutely, of course, no evidence of that.

Just recently, Trump claimed that President Obama founded ISIS. And then he repeated that over and over again.

His latest paranoid fever dream is about my health. All I can say is, Donald, dream on.

But, but my friends-- but my friends, this is what happens when you treat the National Enquirer like Gospel. They said in October I'd be dead in six months.

It's also what happens when you listen to the radio host Alex Jones, who claims that 9/11 and the Oklahoma City bombings were inside jobs. He even said, and this really is just so disgusting, he even said that the victims of the Sandy Hook massacre were child actors and no one was actually killed there. I don't know what actually happens in somebody's mind or how dark their heart must be, to say something like that.

But Trump didn't challenge those lies. He went on Jones' show and said, "Your reputation is amazing. I will not let you down."

This from the man who wants to be President of the United States.

I've stood by President Obama's side as he made the toughest decisions a Commander-in-Chief has to make. In times of crisis, our country depends on steady leadership, clear thinking, calm judgment, because one wrong move can mean the difference between life and death. I know we have veterans here and I know we have families -- mothers and spouses and children of people who are currently serving.

The last thing we need in the Situation Room is a loose cannon who can't tell the difference, or doesn't care to, between fact and fiction, and who buys so easily into racially-tinged rumors. Someone so detached from reality should never be in charge of making decisions that are as real as they come.

That is yet another reason why Donald Trump is simply temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States.

Now, I hear and I read some people who are saying that his bluster and bigotry is just over-heated campaign rhetoric -- an outrageous person saying outrageous things for attention. But look at his policies. The ones that Trump has proposed, they would put prejudice into practice.

And don't be distracted by his latest efforts to muddy the waters. He may have some new people putting new words in his mouth, but we know where he stands.

He would form a deportation force to round up millions of immigrants and kick them out of the country.

He'd abolish the bedrock constitutional principle that says if you're born in the United States, you're an American citizen. He says that children born to undocumented parents in America are "anchor babies" and should be deported. Millions of them.

He'd ban Muslims around the world from entering our country just because of their religion.

Think about that for a minute. How would it actually work? People landing in U.S. airports would line up to get their passports stamped, just like they do now. But in Trump's America, when they step up to the counter, the immigration officer would ask every single person, "What is your religion?"

And then what? What if someone says, "I'm a Christian," but the agent doesn't believe him? Do they have to prove it? How would they do that?

Really, ever since the Pilgrims landed on Plymouth Rock, America has distinguished itself as a haven for people fleeing religious persecution, believing in religious freedom and religious liberty. Under Donald Trump, America would distinguish itself as the only country in the world to impose a religious test at the border.

Now come to think of it, there actually may be one other place that does that. The so-called Islamic State. The territory ISIS controls. What a cruel irony that someone running for President would equate us with them.

Don't worry, some will say, as President, Trump will be surrounded by smart advisors who will rein in his worst impulses.

So when a tweet gets under his skin and he wants to retaliate with a cruise missile, maybe cooler heads will convince him not to.

Well, maybe.

But look at who he's put in charge of his campaign.

Trump likes to say he only hires the "best people." But he's had to fire so many campaign managers it's like an episode from the Apprentice. And the latest shake-up was designed to -- quote -- "Let Trump be Trump." So to do that, he hired Stephen Bannon, the head of a right-wing website, called Breitbart.com, as campaign CEO.

Now to give you a flavor of his work, here are a few headlines they've published. And I'm not making this up.

"Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy."

"Would You Rather Your Child Had Feminism or Cancer?"

"Gabby Giffords: The Gun Control Movement's Human Shield"

"Hoist It High And Proud: The Confederate Flag Proclaims A Glorious Heritage."

That one came shortly after the Charleston massacre, when Democrats and Republicans alike were doing everything they could to heal racial divides that Breitbart and Bannon tried to inflame.

Just imagine -- Donald Trump reading that and thinking: "this is what I need more of in my campaign."

Now Bannon has nasty things to say about pretty much everyone. This spring, he railed against Speaker Paul Ryan for, quote "rubbing his social-justice Catholicism in my nose every second." No wonder he's gone to work for Trump -- the only Presidential candidate ever to get into a public feud with the Pope.

It's truly hard to believe, but according to the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks hate groups, Breitbart embraces "ideas on the extremist fringe of the conservative right." This is not conservatism as we have known it, this is not Republicanism as we have know it. These are racist ideas. Race-baiting ideas. Anti-Muslim, anti-Immigrant, anti-women ---- all key tenets making up an emerging racist ideology known as the "Alt-Right.'

Now, Alt-Right is short for "Alternative Right." The Wall Street Journal describes it as a loose, but organized movement, mostly online, that "rejects mainstream conservatism, promotes nationalism and views immigration and multiculturalism as threats to white identity."

So the de facto merger between Breitbart and the Trump Campaign represents a landmark achievement for this group. A fringe element has effectively taken over the Republican Party.

This is part of a broader story -- the rising tide of hardline, right-wing nationalism around the world.

Just yesterday, one of Britain's most prominent right-wing leaders, a man named, Nigel Farage, who stoked anti-immigrant sentiments to win the referendum to have Britain leave the European Union, campaigned with Donald Trump in Mississippi.

Farage has called for the bar of legal immigrants from public school and health services. Has said women, and I quote, "are worth less than men," and supports scrapping laws that prevent employers from discriminating based on race. That's who Donald Trump wants by his side when he is addressing an audience of American voters.

And the grand godfather of this global brand of extreme nationalism is Russian President Vladimir Putin. In fact, Farage regularly appears on Russian propaganda programs. Now he's standing on the same stage as the Republican nominee. Trump himself heaps praise on Putin and embraces pro-Russian policies. He talks casually of abandoning our NATO allies, recognizing Russia's annexation of Crimea, giving the Kremlin a free hand in Eastern Europe. American Presidents from Truman, to Reagan, to Bush and Clinton, to Obama, have rejected the kind of approach Trump is taking on Russia. And we should, too.

All of this adds up to something we have never seen before. Of course there's always been a paranoid fringe in our politics, a lot of it rising from racial resentment. But it's never had the nominee of a major party stoking it, encouraging it, and giving it a national megaphone. Until now.

On David Duke's radio show the other day, the mood was jubilant. "We appear to have taken over the Republican Party," one white supremacist said. Duke laughed. "No, there's still more work to do," he replied.

So no one should have any illusions about what's really going on here. The names may have changed. Racists now call themselves "racialists." White supremacists now call themselves "white nationalists." The paranoid fringe now calls itself "alt-right." But the hate burns just as bright.

And now Trump is trying to rebrand himself as well. But don't be fooled.

There's an old Mexican proverb that says "Tell me with whom you walk, and I will tell you who you are."

But we know who Trump is. A few words on a teleprompter won't change that.

He says he wants to "make America great again," but more and more it seems as though his real message seems to be "Make America hate again."

And this isn't just about one election. It's about who we are as a nation. It's about the kind of example we want to set for our children and grandchildren.

Next time you see Trump rant on television, think about all the children listening across America. Kids hear a lot more than we think.

Parents and teachers are already worrying about what they call the "Trump Effect." They report that bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools, especially targeting students of color, Muslims, and immigrants. At a recent high school basketball game in Indiana, white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of "Build the wall!" and "Speak English." After a similar incident in Iowa, one frustrated school principal said, "They see it in a presidential campaign and now it's OK for everyone to say this."

We wouldn't tolerate this kind of behavior before and we wouldn't tolerate it in our own homes. And we shouldn't stand for it in a presidential candidate.

My friends, this is a moment of reckoning for every Republican dismayed that the Party of Lincoln has become the Party of Trump. It's a moment of reckoning for all of us who love our country and believe that America is better than this.

Twenty years ago, when Bob Dole accepted the Republican nomination, he pointed to the exits in the convention hall and told any racists in the Party to get out.

The week after 9/11, George W. Bush went to a mosque and declared for everyone to hear that Muslims "love America just as much as I do."

In 2008, John McCain told his own supporters that they were wrong about the man he was trying to defeat. Senator McCain made sure they knew -- Barack Obama, he said, is an American citizen and "a decent person."

We need that kind of leadership again.

We can have our disagreements, and believe me, I understand that. I think that's healthy. We need good debates, but we need to do it in a respectful way, not finger pointing and blaming, and stirring up this bigotry and prejudice.

Every day, more Americans are standing up and saying "enough is enough" -- including a lot of Republicans. And I am honored to have their support in this campaign.

And I promise you this: with your help, I will be a president for Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. For those who vote for me and for those who vote against me. I will be a president for all Americans.

Because I truly believe we are stronger together.

This is a vision for the future rooted in our values and reflected in a rising generation of young people. The young people in america today are the most open, diverse, and connected generation we have ever seen.

How many of you saw any of the Olympics? Right? I was so proud, I always get so carried away whenever the Olympics are on. And you look at the diversity of our athletes -- look at our fabulous Olympic team representing the United Stated of America. Ibtihaj Muhammad, an African-American Muslim from New Jersey, won the bronze medal in fencing with grace and skill. Would she even have a place in Donald Trump's America?

And I will tell you, when I was growing up, in so many parts of our country, Simone Manuel wouldn't have been allowed to swim in the same public pool as Katie Ledecky. And now together on our swimming team they're winning Olympic medals as teammates.

I don't know about you, but I don't think we have a person to waste. We want to build an America where everyone has a place. Where if you work hard and do your part you can get ahead and stay ahead. That's the basic bargain of America. And we cannot get to where we need to be, unless we move forward together and stand up against prejudice and paranoia. And prove, again, that America is great because America is good.

Thank you all so very much, let's go out and win the election. God bless you and God bless the United States of America."

Thank you, Reno! It's great to be back in Nevada

My original plan for this visit was to focus on our agenda to help small businesses and entrepreneurs.

This week we proposed new steps to cut red tape and taxes, and make it easier for small businesses to get the credit they need to grow and hire.

Because I believe that in America, if you can dream it, you should be able to build it. We'll be talking a lot more about our economic plans in the days and weeks ahead. But today, I want to address something I hear from Americans all over our country.

Everywhere I go, people tell me how concerned they are by the divisive rhetoric coming from my opponent in this election. It's like nothing we've heard before from a nominee for President of the United States.

From the start, Donald Trump has built his campaign on prejudice and paranoia.

He's taking hate groups mainstream and helping a radical fringe take over one of America's two major political parties.

His disregard for the values that make our country great is profoundly dangerous.

In just the past week, under the guise of "outreach" to African Americans, Trump has stood up in front of largely white audiences and described black communities in insulting and ignorant terms:

"Poverty. Rejection. Horrible education. No housing. No homes. No ownership.

Crime at levels nobody has seen

Those are his words.

Donald Trump misses so much.

He doesn't see the success of black leaders in every field

The vibrancy of black-owned businessesOr the strength of the black church He doesn't see the excellence of historically black colleges and universities or the pride of black parents watching their children thriveAnd he certainly doesn't have any solutions to take on the reality of systemic racism and create more equity and opportunity in communities of color.

It takes a lot of nerve to ask people he's ignored and mistreated for decades, "What do you have to lose?" The answer is everything!

Trump's lack of knowledge or experience or solutions would be bad enough.

But what he's doing here is more sinister.

Trump is reinforcing harmful stereotypes and offering a dog whistle to his most hateful supporters.

It's a disturbing preview of what kind of President he'd be.

This is what I want to make clear today:

A man with a long history of racial discrimination, who traffics in dark conspiracy theories drawn from the pages of supermarket tabloids and the far reaches of the internet, should never run our government or command our military.

If he doesn't respect respect all Americans, he can't serve all Americans!

Now, I know some people still want to give Trump the benefit of the doubt.

They hope that he will eventually reinvent himself -- that there's a kinder, gentler, more responsible Donald Trump waiting in the wings somewhere.

After all, it's hard to believe anyone -- let alone a nominee for President of the United States -- could really believe all the things he says.

But the hard truth is, there's no other Donald Trump. This is it.

Maya Angelou once said: "When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time."

Well, throughout his career and this campaign, Donald Trump has shown us exactly who he is. We should believe him.

When Trump was getting his start in business, he was sued by the Justice Department for refusing to rent apartments to black and Latino tenants.

Three years later, the Justice Department took Trump back to court because he hadn't changed.

The pattern continued through the decades.

State regulators fined one of Trump's casinos for repeatedly removing black dealers from the floor. No wonder the turn-over rate for his minority employees was way above average.

And let's not forget Trump first gained political prominence leading the charge for the so-called "Birthers."

He promoted the racist lie that President Obama isn't really an American citizen -- part of a sustained effort to delegitimize America's first black President.

In 2015, Trump launched his own campaign for President with another racist lie. He described Mexican immigrants as rapists and criminals.

And he accused the Mexican government of actively sending them across the border. None of that is true.

Oh, and by the way, Mexico's not paying for his wall either.

If it ever gets built, you can be sure that American taxpayers will be stuck with the bill.

Since then, there's been a steady stream of bigotry.

We all remember when Trump said a distinguished federal judge born in Indiana couldn't be trusted to do his job because, quote, "He's a Mexican."

Think about that.

The man who today is the standard bearer of the Republican Party said a federal judge was incapable of doing his job solely because of his heritage.

Even the Republican Speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, described that as "the textbook definition of a racist comment."

To this day, he's never apologized to Judge Curiel.

But for Trump, that's just par for the course.

This is someone who retweets white supremacists online, like the user who goes by the name "white-genocide-TM." Trump took this fringe bigot with a few dozen followers and spread his message to 11 million people.

His campaign famously posted an anti-Semitic image -- a Star of David imposed over a sea of dollar bills -- that first appeared on a white supremacist website.

The Trump campaign also selected a prominent white nationalist leader as a delegate in California. They only dropped him under pressure.

When asked in a nationally televised interview whether he would disavow the support of David Duke, a former leader of the Ku Klux Klan, Trump wouldn't do it. Only later, again under mounting pressure, did he backtrack.

And when Trump was asked about anti-Semitic slurs and death threats coming from his supporters, he refused to condemn them.

Through it all, he has continued pushing discredited conspiracy theories with racist undertones.

Trump said thousands of American Muslims in New Jersey cheered the 9/11 attacks. They didn't.

He suggested that Ted Cruz's father was involved in the Kennedy assassination. Perhaps in Trump's mind, because he was a Cuban immigrant, he must have had something to do with it. Of course there's absolutely no evidence of that.

Just recently, Trump claimed President Obama founded ISIS. And then he repeated that nonsense over and over.

His latest paranoid fever dream is about my health. All I can say is, Donald, dream on.

This is what happens when you treat the National Enquirer like Gospel.

It's what happens when you listen to the radio host Alex Jones, who claims that 9/11 and the Oklahoma City bombings were inside jobs. He said the victims of the Sandy Hook massacre were child actors and no one was actually killed there.

Trump didn't challenge those lies. He went on Jones' show and said: "Your reputation is amazing. I will not let you down."

This man wants to be President of the United States.

I've stood by President Obama's side as he made the toughest decisions a Commander-in-Chief ever has to make.

In times of crisis, our country depends on steady leadership clear thinking and calm judgment because one wrong move can mean the difference between life and death.

The last thing we need in the Situation Room is a loose cannon who can't tell the difference between fact and fiction, and who buys so easily into racially-tinged rumors.

Someone detached from reality should never be in charge of making decisions that are as real as they come.

It's another reason why Donald Trump is simply temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States.

Now, some people will say that his bluster and bigotry is just over-heated campaign rhetoric -- an outrageous person saying outrageous things for attention.

But look at the policies Trump has proposed. They would put prejudice into practice.

And don't be distracted by his latest attempts to muddy the waters.

He may have some new people putting new words in his mouth but we know where he stands.

He would form a deportation force to round up millions of immigrants and kick them out of the country.

He'd abolish the bedrock constitutional principle that says if you're born in the United States, you're an American citizen. He says that children born in America to undocumented parents are, quote, "anchor babies" and should be deported.

Millions of them.

And he'd ban Muslims around the world -- 1.5 billion men, women, and children --from entering our country just because of their religion.

Think about that for a minute. How would it actually work? People landing in U.S. airports would line up to get their passports stamped, just like they do now.

But in Trump's America, when they step up to the counter, the immigration officer would ask every single person, "What is your religion?"

And then what?

What if someone says, "I'm a Christian," but the agent doesn't believe them.

Do they have to prove it? How would they do that?

Ever since the Pilgrims landed on Plymouth Rock, America has distinguished itself as a haven for people fleeing religious persecution.

Under Donald Trump, America would distinguish itself as the only country in the world to impose a religious test at the border.

Come to think of it, there actually may be one place that does that. It's the so-called Islamic State. The territory ISIS controls. It would be a cruel irony if America followed its lead.

Don't worry, some will say, as President, Trump will be surrounded by smart advisors who will rein in his worst impulses.

So when a tweet gets under his skin and he wants to retaliate with a cruise missile, maybe cooler heads will be there to convince him not to.

Maybe.

But look at who he's put in charge of his campaign.

Trump likes to say he only hires the "best people." But he's had to fire so many campaign managers it's like an episode of the Apprentice.

The latest shake-up was designed to -- quote -- "Let Trump be Trump." To do that, he hired Stephen Bannon, the head of a right-wing website called Breitbart.com, as campaign CEO.

To give you a flavor of his work, here are a few headlines they've published:

"Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy."

"Would You Rather Your Child Had Feminism or Cancer?"

"Gabby Giffords: The Gun Control Movement's Human Shield"

"Hoist It High And Proud: The Confederate Flag Proclaims A Glorious Heritage."

That one came shortly after the Charleston massacre, when Democrats and Republicans alike were doing everything they could to heal racial divides. Breitbart tried to enflame them further.

Just imagine -- Donald Trump reading that and thinking: "this is what I need more of in my campaign."

Bannon has nasty things to say about pretty much everyone.

This spring, he railed against Paul Ryan for, quote "rubbing his social-justice Catholicism in my nose every second."

No wonder he's gone to work for Trump -- the only Presidential candidate ever to get into a public feud with the Pope.

According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks hate groups, Breitbart embraces "ideas on the extremist fringe of the conservative right. Racist ideas.

Race-baiting ideas. Anti-Muslim and anti-Immigrant ideas ---- all key tenets making up an emerging racist ideology known as the "Alt-Right.'"

Alt-Right is short for "Alternative Right."

The Wall Street Journal describes it as a loosely organized movement, mostly online, that "rejects mainstream conservatism, promotes nationalism and views immigration and multiculturalism as threats to white identity."

The de facto merger between Breitbart and the Trump Campaign represents a landmark achievement for the "Alt-Right." A fringe element has effectively taken over the Republican Party.

This is part of a broader story -- the rising tide of hardline, right-wing nationalism around the world.

Just yesterday, one of Britain's most prominent right-wing leaders, Nigel Farage, who stoked anti-immigrant sentiments to win the referendum on leaving the European Union, campaigned with Donald Trump in Mississippi.

Farage has called for a ban on the children of legal immigrants from public schools and health services, has said women are quote "worth less" than men, and supports scrapping laws that prevent employers from discriminating based on race -- that's who Trump wants by his side

The godfather of this global brand of extreme nationalism is Russian President Vladimir Putin.

In fact, Farage has appeared regularly on Russian propaganda programs.

Now he's standing on the same stage as the Republican nominee.

Trump himself heaps praise on Putin and embrace pro-Russian policies.

He talks casually of abandoning our NATO allies, recognizing Russia's annexation of Crimea, and of giving the Kremlin a free hand in Eastern Europe more generally.

American presidents from Truman to Reagan have rejected the kind of approach Trump is taking on Russia.

We should, too.

All of this adds up to something we've never seen before.

Of course there's always been a paranoid fringe in our politics, steeped in racial resentment. But it's never had the nominee of a major party stoking it, encouraging it, and giving it a national megaphone. Until now.

On David Duke's radio show the other day, the mood was jubilant.

"We appear to have taken over the Republican Party," one white supremacist said.

Duke laughed. There's still more work to do, he said.

No one should have any illusions about what's really going on here. The names may have changed Racists now call themselves "racialists." White supremacists now call themselves "white nationalists." The paranoid fringe now calls itself "alt-right." But the hate burns just as bright.

And now Trump is trying to rebrand himself as well. Don't be fooled.

There's an old Mexican proverb that says "Tell me with whom you walk, and I will tell you who you are."

We know who Trump is. A few words on a teleprompter won't change that.

He says he wants to "make America great again," but his real message remains "Make America hate again."

This isn't just about one election. It's about who we are as a nation.

It's about the kind of example we want to set for our children and grandchildren.

Next time you watch Donald Trump rant on television, think about all the kids listening across our country. They hear a lot more than we think.

Parents and teachers are already worried about what they're calling the "Trump Effect."

Bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools, especially targeting students of color, Muslims, and immigrants.

At a recent high school basketball game in Indiana, white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of "Build the wall!" and "Speak English."

After a similar incident in Iowa, one frustrated school principal said, "They see it in a presidential campaign and now it's OK for everyone to say this."

We wouldn't tolerate that kind of behavior in our own homes. How can we stand for it from a candidate for president?

This is a moment of reckoning for every Republican dismayed that the Party of Lincoln has become the Party of Trump. It's a moment of reckoning for all of us who love our country and believe that America is better than this.

Twenty years ago, when Bob Dole accepted the Republican nomination, he pointed to the exits and told any racists in the Party to get out.

The week after 9/11, George W. Bush went to a mosque and declared for everyone to hear that Muslims "love America just as much as I do."

In 2008, John McCain told his own supporters they were wrong about the man he was trying to defeat. Senator McCain made sure they knew -- Barack Obama is an American citizen and "a decent person."

We need that kind of leadership again.

Every day, more Americans are standing up and saying "enough is enough" -- including a lot of Republicans. I'm honored to have their support.

And I promise you this: with your help, I will be a President for Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. For those who vote for me and those who don't.

For all Americans

Because I believe we are stronger together.

It's a vision for the future rooted in our values and reflected in a rising generation of young people who are the most open, diverse, and connected we've ever seen.

Just look at our fabulous Olympic team.

Like Ibtihaj Muhammad, an African-American Muslim from New Jersey who won the bronze medal in fencing with grace and skill. Would she even have a place in Donald Trump's America?

When I was growing up, Simone Manuel wouldn't have been allowed to swim in the same public pool as Katie Ledecky. Now they're winning Olympic medals as teammates.

So let's keep moving forward together.

Let's stand up against prejudice and paranoia.

Let's prove once again, that America is great because is America is good

Thank you, and may God bless the United States.

"Thank you! Thank you so much. I have to tell you, I am thrilled to be here for a number of reasons.

First, it's wonderful to be back in Michigan. You can really feel the energy and dynamism that is driving this state's comeback.

And in Detroit, we've got new businesses that are opening. Neighborhoods like Midtown and Eastern Market are coming back. The auto industry just had its best year ever.

Over in Ann Arbor, high tech firms are thriving. The next generation of engineers are getting trained up in Houghton. And here at Futuramic -- so well named -- you are on the front lines of what I believe will be a true manufacturing renaissance in America.

And I just was given a short, but exciting, tour by Mark Jurcak and John Couch, who were telling me about how this company was started as, and for most of its early history, was an auto supply company. And then in 2000 as the market began to change and some of the auto companies began to realign, they were faced with a choice.

We all face choices in life, don't we? And this company could have just said, "Hey, you know, our business is not going to be what it was, we've got to just fold up, let's just kind of quit."

But that's not what happened here, and what happened here is what can happen across America. You are in now, what is largely an aerospace company. And because of the work force and the work ethic and the commitment of Futuramic, you are seeing the future unfold. So I got to see what's happening here to help build the SLS rocket that is going to go from Macomb to Mars.

I saw the two halves of an F-35 nose cone waiting to be put together. I talked with some of the workers about the absolute perfection that is required to do this work. And what I believe with all my heart, is that what's happening here can happen in so many places if we put our minds to it. If we support advanced manufacturing. If we are the kind of country that once again understands how important it is the build things.

We are builders and we need to get back to building!

So we're making progress, none of us can be satisfied until the economic revitalization we're seeing in some parts of Michigan reaches every community. But it is inspiring to see this combination of old-fashioned hard work and cutting-edge innovation.

And I know my opponent in this election was here in Michigan about a week ago, and it was like he was in a different place. When he visited Detroit on Monday, he talked only of failure, poverty, and crime. He's missing so much about what makes Michigan great.

And the same is true when it comes to our country. He describes America as an embarrassment. He said --and I quote -- "We're becoming a third-world country." Look around you, my friends. Go visit with the workers building rockets. That doesn't happen in third world countries.

Now we have a lot of urgent and important work to do -- and that's what I'm going to talk about today -- because all the people that I've met in this campaign really prove how wrong this negative, pessimistic view is. America's best days are still ahead of us if we make up our minds to actually go out and make that happen.

Just consider our assets: We have the most dynamic, productive workforce in the world, bar none. We have the most innovative businesses. The top colleges, universities, community colleges, training programs in the world. And the best science and technology. We have enormous capacity for clean energy production.

We are resilient, determined, hard-working. There is nothing America can't do -- if we do it together. And I know this because this is how I was raised.

And I don't think Mr. Trump understands any of it. He hasn't offered any credible solutions for the very real economic challenges we face.

Those challenges emerged long before the Great Recession, and they have persisted through our recovery. There is too much inequality, too little upward mobility. It is just too hard to get ahead today.

But there are common-sense things that your government could do that would give Americans more opportunities to succeed. Why don't we do it? Because powerful special interests and the tendency to put ideology ahead of political progress have led to gridlock in Congress.

How can you not be frustrated, and even angry, when you see nothing getting done? And a lot of people feel no one is on their side and no one has their back and that is not how it's supposed to be in America. If I am fortunate enough to be your President, I will have your back every single day that I serve. My mission in the White House will be to make our economy work for everyone, not just those at the top.

This is personal for me. I am the product of the American middle class, I was born in Chicago, I was raised in a suburb. But my grandfather worked at the Scranton lace mill in Scranton, Pennsylvania, for 50 years. And because he worked hard, my Dad was able to go to college, and eventually start his own small business -- and then send me out into the world to follow my dreams.

No matter how far those dreams have taken me, I have always remembered, I'm the daughter of a small-business owner and the granddaughter of a factory worker -- and proud of both.

So here's what I want. I want every American family to be able to tell the same story. If you work hard, you do your part, you should be able to give your children all the opportunities they deserve. That is the basic bargain of America.

Now whether we will be able to renew that bargain on even better terms for the 21st century depends in large measure, on the outcome of this election.

So here are four questions that I hope the American people will ask of both candidates -- and that the answers should make your choice in November crystal clear:

First, which candidate has a real plan to create good-paying jobs?

Second, who will restore fairness to our economy and ensure that those at the top pay their fair share of taxes?

Third, who will really go to bat for working families?

And fourth, who can bring people together to deliver results that will make a difference in your lives?

Now I hope that after giving a fair hearing to both sides, you will join the millions of people across our country supporting this campaign -- not just Democrats, but a growing number of Republicans and Independents as well.

Now when it comes to creating jobs, I would argue it's not even close. Even conservative experts say Trump's agenda will pull our economy back into recession.

And according to an independent analysis by a former economic advisor to Senator John McCain, if you add up all of Trump's ideas -- from cutting taxes for the wealthy and corporations, to starting a trade war with China, to deporting millions of hard-working immigrants -- the result would be a loss of 3.4 million jobs.

By contrast, the same analyst found that with our plans, the economy would create more than 10 million new jobs.

So let me tell you how we would do that. I believe every American willing to work hard should be able to find a job that provides dignity, pride and decent pay that can support a family.

So starting on Day One, we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II.

We will put Americans to work building and modernizing our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our railways, our ports, our airports.

We are way overdue for this, my friends. We are living off the investments that were made by our parents' and grandparents' generations.

We will also help cities like Detroit and Flint connect underserved neighborhoods to opportunity, expanding affordable housing, and we will repair schools and failing water systems as well. You know, I happen to think we should be ambitious: while we're at it, let's connect every household in America to broadband by the year 2020.

It's astonishing to me how many places in America, not way, way far away from cities, but in cities and near cities that don't have access to broadband. And that disadvantages kids who are asked to do homework using the internet. 5 million of them live in homes without access to the internet. So you talk about an achievement gap, it starts right there.

And let's build a cleaner, more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in our country as well. Some country is going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century and create millions of jobs and businesses. It's probably going to be either China, Germany, or America. I want it to be us! We invent the technology, we should make it and use it and export it, which will help to grow our economy.

And here's something that you don't always hear enough of from Democrats: a big part of our plan will be unleashing the power of the private sector to create more jobs at higher pay. And that means for us, creating an infrastructure bank to get private funds off the sidelines and complement our private investments. $25 billion in government seed funding could unlock more than $250 billion and really get our country moving on our infrastructure plans.

And we're going to invest $10 billion in what we're calling "Make it in America" partnerships to support American manufacturing and recommit to scientific research that can create entire new industries.

When Mark and John were giving me the tour and I was talking to some of the workers along the way, and asking them where some of the precision machinery came from that is being used here at Futuramic.

What I hear all over the country, Germany, Japan, Italy. I want to bring that precision manufacturing back to the United States. There is no reason we can't begin to make those machines ourselves and supply the rest of the world instead of buying from somewhere else.

Let's also expand incentives like the New Markets Tax Credit that can bring business, government, and communities together to create good jobs in places that have been left out or left behind. From neglected neighborhoods in Detroit and Flint, to Logging Country, Coal Country, Native American communities, from rural areas ravaged by addiction and lost jobs to industrial regions hollowed out when factories closed.

As President, I will also make a major push to empower small businesses and entrepreneurs, with new national initiatives to cut red tape at every level and expand access to credit, especially through community banks and credit unions.

I will propose a new plan to dramatically simplify tax filing for small businesses. Right now, the smallest businesses, the kind that my dad had, because it was a really small company, spend 20 times more per employee to prepare their taxes compared to larger companies. It should be as easy as printing out a bank statement.

Let's free entrepreneurs to do what they do best -- innovate, grow, and hire. As Mark said, this company started because of a drive down a road and thinking about it, talking about it, then seeing one of the old Oldsmobile Futuramics and thinking "Hey, not only do I have an idea, I've got a name". In America, if you can dream it, you should be able to build it, and we're going to get back to doing that.

Now Donald Trump has a different view. He's made a career out of stiffing small businesses from Atlantic City to Las Vegas. There are companies that were left hanging because he refused to pay their bills. A lot of those companies scraped together what the could to pay their employees, and many of them put their businesses at risk and some of them ended up taking bankruptcy. It wasn't because Trump couldn't pay them, it was because he wouldn't pay them.

And that's why I take it personally. My dad ran a printing plant. He had two really long tables, he printed fabric for draperies. He would lay out the fabric and then he would take a silkscreen and he would go down the table. Put the silkscreen down, he'd put the paint in, he take the squeegee, he'd go across the screen, he'd lift it up, he'd go down, go down all the way to the end. And then he'd start on the other table.

He worked hard. And then when he finished, he would load all that fabric up, put it into his car, and take it to the business that had ordered it, maybe a restaurant or a hotel or some office. He expected to be paid when he showed up. He did the work. He paid for the supplies and the labor he often hired to help him on big jobs. He expected to be paid. I can't imagine what would have happened to my father and his business if he had gotten a contract from Trump. And showing up and submitting his bill and being told, "We're not going to pay. And if you don't like it, sue us."

My father never could have sued a big organization like that. I just don't understand it. I've met all kinds of workers, painters, plumbers. I've met small businesses that provided pianos, installed glass or marble, all of whom were denied payment, and after going back time and again, being told, "Well, maybe we'll pay you 30 cents on the dollar or 50 cents on the dollar." That's not how we do business in America.

So we've got to create more jobs that are going to help more people.

For example, our modern service economy is empowering consumers with more choices and greater flexibility. But we need to do more to empower the workers in our service sector too. The people taking care of our children and our parents, they deserve a good wage, good benefits, and a secure retirement.

And, it's crucial that every American have access to the education and skills they need to get the jobs of the future.

So we will fight to make college tuition-free for the middle class and debt-free for everyone.

We will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt by making it easier to refinance and repay what you owe as a portion of your income so you don't have to pay more than you can afford.

It's just not right that Donald Trump can ignore his debts, but students and families can't refinance their debt.

And here's something else I really want to emphasize, because I don't think anyone in America is talking about this enough and that is: a four year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America.

You should be able to learn a skill, practice a trade, and make a good living doing it.

So many Americans have the talent and the will to succeed ---- whether they're kids right out of high school or older people displaced by automation and outsourcing.

For too long, big promises about the power of training and retraining haven't delivered like they should. It doesn't help anyone to be trained for a job that doesn't exist.

So here's what we're going to do. We will support high-quality union training programs. We will propose new tax credits to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeships that let you earn while you learn. We will do more, including a national campaign, to dignify skills training across the board. I think we've got to reverse what has become a kind of commonplace view, which is everybody needs to go to college.

Well in fact, more than half of the jobs that are going to be available in 2020 do not require a college, four-year degree. So, for welders and machinists and tool and die makers and health technicians and coders and so many others, let's get the word out. There are really good jobs for people right now, and there will be more in the future if you get the skills in high school, at community college, in an apprenticeship or other training programs.

And I want to acknowledge the great role that the community college here in Macomb County has played in working with companies like this one to make sure people do have the skills. Now, I imagine some of you -- I'm sure some of you are thinking, "Well, that all sounds good, but what about trade?" After all, Trump talks about it all the time.

Well, let's start with this: It's true that too often, past trade deals have been sold to the American people with rosy scenarios that did not pan out. Those promises now ring hollow in many communities across Michigan and our country that have seen factories close and jobs disappear.

Too many companies lobbied for trade deals so they could sell products abroad but then they instead moved abroad and sold back into the United States.

It is also true that China and other countries have gamed the system for too long. Enforcement -- particularly during the Bush administration -- has been too lax.

Investments at home that would make us more competitive have been completely blocked in Congress. And American workers and communities have paid the price.

But the answer is not to rant and rave -- or cut ourselves off from the world. That would end up killing even more jobs. The answer is to finally make trade work for us, not against us.

So my message to every worker in Michigan and across America is this: I will stop any trade deal that kills jobs or holds down wages -- including the Trans-Pacific Partnership. I oppose it now, I'll oppose it after the election, and I'll oppose it as President.

As a Senator from New York, I fought to defend New York's manufacturers and steel-makers from unfair Chinese trading practices. And I opposed the only multilateral trade deal that came before the Senate while I was there, because it didn't meet my high bar.

As Secretary of State, I fought hard for American businesses to get a fair shot around the world and to stop underhanded trading practices like currency manipulation and the theft of intellectual property.

So as President, I will stand up to China and anyone else who tries to take advantage of American workers and companies. And I'm going to ramp up enforcement by appointing, for the first time, a chief trade prosecutor, I will triple the number of enforcement officers, and when countries break the rules, we won't hesitate to impose targeted tariffs.

Now Mr. Trump may talk a big game on trade, but his approach is based on fear, not strength. Fear that we can't compete with the rest of the world even when the rules are fair. Fear that our country has no choice but to hide behind walls.

If Team USA was as fearful as Trump, Michael Phelps and Simone Biles would be cowering in the locker room, afraid to come out to compete. Instead, they're winning gold medals. America isn't afraid to compete.

Right now, thousands of Michigan companies are exporting billions of dollars of products around the world. We want them to sell even more, and create more jobs here at home. But corporations should not abandon profitable operations here in the United States to move abroad, just to give shareholders a quicker return, CEOs a bigger bonus, and unions a weaker hand to play.

Now, before he tweets about how he's really one who will put "America First" in trade, let's remember where Trump makes many of his own products. Because it sure is not America.

He's made Trump ties in China and Trump suits in Mexico instead of here in Michigan. He keeps saying it's not possible to make these things in America anymore, and that's just wrong.
So we created a website -- hillaryclinton.com/make-it-here -- on it we list a hundred places across the United States that already producing similar goods.

Now one positive thing Trump could do to make America great again is actually make great things in America again.

Now, let's look at the second question: which candidate will fight for fairness? And this is an urgent need. We need to grow the economy and we need to make it fairer. The tide is not rising fast enough, and it's certainly not lifting all boats. Since the crash, too many of the gains have gone to the top one percent.

The rules and incentives in our system reward corporations for putting short-term stock prices above long-term investments in their workers, equipment, and research. While corporate profits are at near-record highs, paychecks for most people have barely budged. Incomes aren't growing fast enough to keep up with costs like prescription drugs and child care.

I believe that every employee, from the CEO suite to the factory floor, contributes to a business' success, so everybody should share in the rewards -- especially those putting in long hours for little pay.

So I'm proposing a new tax credit to encourage more companies to share profits with workers. More broadly, we will fight for a more progressive, more patriotic tax code that puts American jobs first.

Right now, when a corporation outsources jobs and production, it can write off the costs. We must stop that, and we must make them pay back any tax breaks they received from any level of government in our country.

For those that move their headquarters overseas to avoid paying their fair share of taxes, they're going to have to pay a new exit tax. So if they want to go, they're going to have to pay to go.

And Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich, should finally pay their fair share of taxes. That's why I support the so-called "Buffett Rule," because multi-millionaires should not be able to pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries.

We should also add a new tax on multi-millionaires, crack down on tax gaming by corporations and close the carried interest loophole -- something I've advocated for years.

Now, compare what Trump says. Now there is a myth out there that he'll stick it to the rich and powerful because, somehow, he's really on the side of the little guy. Don't believe it.

Not when he pledges to rip up basic rules that hold corporations accountable, when he wants to scrap regulations that stop polluters from poisoning the air our children breathe and the water we drink, let insurance companies write their own rules again.

Trump would roll back the tough rules that we have imposed on the Financial Industry. I'll do the opposite -- I think we should strengthen those rules so that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again.

Trump even wants to abolish the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a new agency that has already returned more than $11 billion to 25 million Americans who were taken advantage of by corporations. Why would you get rid of that?

And then there is Trump's tax plan. He would give trillions in tax cuts to big corporations, millionaires, and Wall Street money managers. That would explode our national debt and eventually lead to massive cuts in priorities like education, healthcare, and environmental protection.

In his speech on Monday, he called for a new tax loophole -- let's call it the Trump Loophole -- because it would allow him to pay less than half the current tax rate on income from many of his companies. He'd pay a lower rate than millions of middle class families.

One nonpartisan expert at the Tax Policy Center described this plan as, and I quote, "a really nice deal for Donald Trump."

Of course, it's hard to say how nice, because he refuses to do what every other presidential candidate in decades has done and release his tax returns.

But we do know that the 400 richest taxpayers in America would get an average tax cut of more than $15 million a year from the Trump loophole.

Then there's the Estate Tax, which Trump wants to eliminate altogether. If you believe that he's as wealthy as he says, that alone would save the Trump family $4 billion. It would do nothing for 99.8 percent of Americans. So they'd get a $4 billion tax cut, and 99.8 percent of Americans get nothing.

Just think about what we could do with those $4 billion dollars. We could pay for more than 47,000 veterans to get a 4-year college degree. We could provide a year's worth of health care to nearly 3 million kids. Or we could fund about a year's worth of federal assistance to state and local law enforcement. I think there are a lot of better ways to spend the money.

On Monday, I'm going to be in Scranton, Pennsylvania, with Vice President Biden. He has a saying: "Don't tell me what you value. Show me your budget and I will tell you what you value."

Well, Donald Trump wants to give trillions in tax breaks to people like himself. I want to invest it in veterans, our kids, our police officers, and so much more. And you can then draw your own conclusions about values.

Now, it's true that both of us have proposed to cut taxes for middle class families. He's making a big promise. But his advisors have said, his own advisors have said, he may not stand by them.

Instead, the tax cuts he doubled down on in his speech in Detroit on Monday offer trillions to the richest Americans and corporations.

One of the differences between Donald Trump and me is I'm telling you what I will do, I'm laying out my plans, and I will stand by them, and I want you to hold me accountable for delivering results. This all reminds me of that old saying, "if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is."

And that brings us to the third question: Which candidate can you actually count on to go to bat for workers and working families?

It's not enough to pay lip service to being on your side. We have to recognize how Americans actually live and work in the 21st century -- and then offer real solutions that make your lives easier.

We know that women are now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of families.
We know more Americans are cobbling together part time work, or striking out on their own. So we have to make it easier to be good workers, good parents, and good caregivers, all at the same time.

That's why I've set out a bold vision to make quality, affordable childcare available to all Americans and limit the costs to 10 percent of family income.

On Monday, Trump offered his first real ideas on this topic. Because previously, he dismissed concerns about childcare. He said it was, quote, "not an expensive thing" because you just need some blocks and some swings.

Now he says he wants to exclude childcare payments from taxation. His plan was panned from the left, the right, the center -- because it transparently is designed for rich people like him. He would give wealthy families 30 or 40 cents on the dollar for their nannies, and little or nothing for millions of hard-working families trying to afford childcare so they can get to work and keep the job.

I think instead we should expand the Child Tax Credit to provide real relief to tens of millions of working families struggling with the costs of raising children -- the same families that his plan ignores.

And that's just the start. Because the more we do to help working families, the more our entire economy will benefit.

For example, guaranteeing equal pay won't just increase paychecks for women -- it will boost family budgets and get incomes rising across the board. And I don't understand why Trump's against that.

Paid family leave won't only make life easier for Moms and Dads -- it will also keep skilled, talented Americans in the workforce and grow our economy. That's why every other advanced country already has it. Again, he's against it.

Raising the federal minimum wage won't just put more money in the pockets of low-income families -- it also means they will spend more at the businesses in their neighborhoods. Trump's against that as well.

This is something that even the original automakers understood, way back at the beginning of the 20th century, when they decided to pay the unbelievable sum of $5 a day to autoworkers. And when they were criticized by other businesses, "How can you pay that much?" they had the best answer, "We want people to be able to buy our cars." This is Economics 101, we need to get incomes and wages rising and it will help the whole economy grow and be fairer.

And protecting and expanding Social Security doesn't just help older Americans retire with dignity -- it helps to ease burdens on families and communities. And I also believe the same thing about comprehensive immigration reform.

We already have millions of people working in the economy and paying $12 billion a year to Social Security even though they are undocumented. So by moving toward reform, we will unleash a lot of new income and growth, and we will level the playing field so that American workers can't be taken advantage of because undocumented workers can be exploited by employers, which is one of the reasons we have this disconnect.

And finally, strengthening unions doesn't just serve members -- it leads to better pay and benefits, and working conditions for all employees. I've also said I will defend and improve the Affordable Care Act, and for me, that includes giving Americans, in every state, a choice of a public option health insurance plan that will help everybody afford coverage, it will strengthen competition, and drive down costs.

Now these are all causes I've worked on for decades and I believe they point to a fundamental truth about our economy. It can seem like a zero sum, when you are competing for a job, a promotion, or a contract if someone wins and someone loses, but that is not the full picture. If you step back, you'll see we're all in this together. If we can grow together, we can all rise together. Because, you know what I like to say, we are stronger together, and that's why the fourth question is key.

And it's this: who can bring people together to get any of this done? Right? Well, I believe I can because I think I can provide serious, steady leadership that can find common ground and build on it based on hard, but respectful bargaining with the other side.

Leadership that rises above personal attacks and name calling, not revels in it. I just don't think insults and bullying is how we're going to get things done. And I don't think that's the appropriate approach for us.

I know it's hard to imagine, but there was a time when Democrats and Republicans actually worked together.

I know that's true, I did it as First Lady, Senator, and Secretary of State. It's how we created the Children's Health Insurance Program, which covers 8 million kids. It's how we rebuilt New York after 9/11, and how we passed a treaty reducing the threat from Russia's nuclear weapons.

So I am convinced based on my experience, that we can do this. And one of the reasons that I asked Tim Kaine to be my running mate is he also has a record of working across the aisle to get things done as a mayor, governor, and a Senator.

So we're going to make full use of the White House's power to convene. We're going to get everyone at the table -- not just Republicans and Democrats, but businesses and labor unions, academics and experts, but, most importantly, Americans, like all of you.

I think there are a lot of great ideas out in America, and I want you to have a say in your government. And that means we have to get unaccountable money out of our politics, overturn Citizens United, and expand voting rights, not restrict them.

I intend, starting even before the election, to bring together leaders from across our economy, from a lot of different places to talk about jobs, and competitiveness, and I hope Mark and John can join me, because we need the best ideas that are out there making a difference. We need to pull together.

The bottom line is this: I'm running for President to build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And based on what we know from the Trump campaign, he wants America to work for him and his friends, at the expense of everyone else.

He's offered no credible plans to address what working families are up against today. Nothing on student loans or the cost of prescription drugs. Nothing for farmers or struggling rural communities. Nothing to build a new future with clean energy and advanced agriculture.

Nothing for communities of color in our cities to overcome the barriers of systemic racism. Nothing to create new opportunities for young people. Just a more extreme version of the failed theory of trickle-down economics, with his own addition of outlandish Trumpian ideas that even Republicans reject. And as we heard him say at his convention, he may believe that he alone can fix our country, but clearly, he doesn't know the people of Michigan. He doesn't see the businesses, and labor unions, the local governments, the clergy coming together every single day to make things better.

So yes, there is still a long road ahead, but Michigan is on the rise. And everyone is contributing. That's America at its best.

So I hope you will stay active and engaged and working together to create jobs and strengthen your own communities. And I hope you will work to get out the vote in November, because if we are able to win, then I want you all to work with me to build the kind of progress that America deserves to see.

We're going to do this together. We are stronger together. Let's go out and build the future! Thank you all, God bless you!"

"Thank you so much, Mike and Leigh and everybody. I am excited about being here, and I so appreciate what Mike and Leigh took their time to tell me about. Because this company, which has grown pretty dramatically in the last four and a half years, is a great example of what it means to be a small business company that then grows and takes advantage of all the opportunities that are available.

And I was grateful when I asked both of them, "So what would you want me to do? What worked? What didn't?' that they gave me a terrific point of view. And just to quickly recap, because I agree with everything they said, they got a lot of help from the SBA -- twice now -- but they agree with me that the SBA is just not doing enough. It's not a -- its mandate is not big enough; it doesn't include enough continuing help and outreach so that people with good ideas like they had know where to go, kind of a one-stop shop, if you will, to get all the information that they need. And I'm going to do everything I can to expand that mandate and to provide a much better conduit, to use Mike's term, of information coming to people starting their small businesses.

The second thing they said which was exciting is that when they first opened up their very first -- what do they call those big silver things? Brew-house -- their very first brew-house came from China. And then they found a local company not far from here who could do exactly the same thing, so all of these other brew-houses are made right here, about four or five miles right down the street. BrewFab, right? BrewFab. So that's another thing I'm pushing, is for companies to look to see if there aren't American suppliers who can actually provide what they need in order to have a great partnership. And I'm thrilled that what you see here illustrates that.

The third thing they told me is they had a great experience with the State Department, which I was very happy to hear, because when I was Secretary of State I really stressed exports, and you can't do exports unless you have an active group of people who are reaching out once again, trying to come up with support for businesses.

And my dad was a small businessman, a very, very small business that he started and ran, so I was particularly keen that we not just help the giant American corporations but we help the small businesses, the medium-sized businesses. And Mike told me that he had a great experience on a State Department-sponsored visit to Costa Rica, right? To Costa Rica?

And that's exactly what I want to see more of too, because you can't just expect to compete and win in the global economy by waiting for it to come to you, and you can't do it on your own, so it's really important to me that the government does more to help companies like 3 Daughters get out into the world so that their products can be given an equal chance to compete and win. Because I know that if we do that, nobody can outcompete American workers and businesses. We just have to be out there doing everything possible to make it reality.

And then the final thing that I picked up from talking to both of them is how committed they are to their employees, but how they could sure use some help finding out what are all of the benefits and opportunities that are available through the federal government -- through the tax system, for example. How can we do a better job making sure that small companies like this have the help they need to understand everything that they have to do and cut the costs and streamline it. So, for example, they were telling me that if they could get a kind of package of help -- because right now, employees spend a lot of time figuring out excise tax, which is pretty complicated, and I want to try to blow through all that, simplify it, flatten it, make it possible for companies like this to get the information.

And they came up with a really good suggestion: people who register LLCs, if they're going to have employees, they should immediately get a package of information, like here's how you can get help understanding what you have to do to register in different jurisdictions to pay taxes in different jurisdictions and the like. As much as we can simplify and use technology to simplify, the cheaper then it will be for companies like this to be successful and to grow as quickly as this one has.

So I feel like I've learned a lot today. I really appreciate your being so well prepared to give me these great ideas that I can then try to take and put to work on behalf of businesses like yours and businesses across the country. Because it really is true that I feel a special bond with small businesses, and I have said that I want to be a small business president because of my dad's experience, and this is one of the big differences between me and the Republican nominee. My dad worked really hard.

He ran a small print plant so that in a much lower-ceilinged, darker room, he had long tables that he would roll fabric out on and then he would take a silkscreen -- and he would do all this by hand -- you put the silkscreen down, you put the paint in, you take a squeegee, you go from side to side and then you pick it up and you go down all the way to the end of the long table, then you'd go to the other table, so that while this table was drying then you'd come up and if there was a two-color pattern, you'd put another silkscreen on and you'd do it all over again.

So he worked really hard and made a good living for my mother, my brothers and me, and that's why I just can't imagine -- he worked so hard -- if he had delivered the finished goods to the people who had ordered them, that they would have said, "We're not going to pay you.' And that's what Trump has done time and time again. It would be like you'd get a big order from one of his resorts or casinos. That would be pretty exciting here. And people would work really hard.

And then they wouldn't pay you. Or maybe they'd say, we're only going to pay you 50 cents or 30 cents on the dollar. I just can't imagine. I know what it would mean to my family, but I can't imagine what it would mean to any family. And in fact, just recently there -- most people who are in that position that I've met who have been stiffed by him, they were told, "Well, go sue us.' Well, people can't afford to sue somebody who hires a bunch of lawyers in order to fight back. It just doesn't make sense.

But there was a small mom-and-pop shop down in South Florida that did sue him because they had helped renovate one of his golf courses. And they knew that if they didn't get paid, it was over for them. They couldn't keep their doors open. So they did sue him, and they got a judgment, and then they even got attorneys' fees. So maybe the tide is turning because I've met painters and plumbers and glass installers and marble installers and architects and piano companies that have been operating under a contract which then was never honored.

And the most fundamental thing in our economic system is you make a contract. You make a deal with somebody. You keep your end of the bargain. They keep their end of the bargain. That's how we do business, and that's how we're going to continue to grow small businesses in America. Because I think Mike told me that there are 52 employees, 18 full-time. Right?

Small businesses create most of the jobs in America, two-thirds. So we can't grow the economy if we don't really grow small businesses. And I'm going to do everything I can in this campaign and then in the White House to be a great president for small business, and to consult people like Mike and Leigh who can give me firsthand, real information about what works and what doesn't work so that we don't get this big disconnect where you're trying to do something, and it's just not working.

And the final thing that make said, which I am going to be doing everything I can, is to get health care costs down. We've got a lot of people who are insured now because of the Affordable Care Act, but the costs are too high. We need to get prescription drug costs down and premiums and copays and all of the costs because other companies have told me the very same thing. And so I'm going to be working hard on that as well.

So again, let me thank you for having us here. I want to say hello to everybody, maybe get some pictures if you wanted to, and have a chance -- if anybody has any other ideas about how we're going to promote and grow small businesses. And again, Leigh was telling me about the meaning of the flags here as well, and I bet in a few years you're going to have flags hanging from every part of this ceiling as a real tribute to the people who have served our country. And I greatly appreciate that as well.

Thank you all very much."

"Morning! I am so pleased to be here, I want to thank you all for the invitation, for the introduction, to everyone associated with NABJ and NAHJ, I want to just mark the moment because you were created in this hotel.

I don't know if there are any original founders, but if there are could you all stand up and we could give you some recognition?

I am delighted to thank you for the important work you do every day, and now more than ever we need you to keep holding leaders and candidates accountable. And in the tradition of path-breaking journalists like Ethel Payne and Ruben Salazar, we need you to make sure that America's front pages and nightly newscasts and online information reflects the great diversity of our nation.

Someone that I had the privilege of knowing, the late, great Bob Maynard, former owner of the Oakland Tribune, once said -- and I quote Bob -- "It is in seeing ourselves whole that we can begin to see ways of working out our differences of understanding our similarities,' and becoming a more cohesive nation.

And that is what you do every day, helping us to see ourselves as whole. You help us see ourselves whole.

I'm looking forward to our discussion, which I'm sure will cover a wide range of issues, but I want to take just a few minutes to focus on a challenge that doesn't get enough attention out on the campaign trail, although I've been trying, and that is: how do we expand economic opportunity for African Americans and Latinos across America?

And you know very well, it's been said that when the economy catches a cold, communities of color get pneumonia. The Great Recession hit our whole country hard, but the toll was especially difficult for black and Latino families. Black wealth was cut in half. For Latinos, it dropped 66 percent. That represented decades, even generations of hard work. And during these past 18 months, people across the country have described to me how hard it's been to get back on their feet in an economy that is still not working the way we all want to see it. And barriers of systemic racism makes that even harder.

Now I believe that President Obama does not get the credit he deserves for leading us out of the Great Recession, and I like to remind people he had nothing to do with creating it in the first place. He came into office and this worst-of-all-financial-crises-since-the-Great-Depression was handed to him. And I think if you fairly look at the record, you have to conclude that his leadership saved us from a Great Depression.

So as bad as things became -- 9 million jobs lost, 5 million homes lost, $13 trillion in family wealth wiped out -- as bad as it was, there's no telling how far down we would have gone without his leadership. So we are out of the ditch that we were in, and now we've got to do even more. We've got to build on the progress we've made. 15 million new jobs in the last seven years. 20 million people now have health insurance who did not have it before he became President.

So we've got to have the will and the plans together to move forward. That's why I've proposed a comprehensive new commitment to African American and Latino communities to make serious, sustained investments to create more good-paying jobs; to help families build and rebuild wealth; and support black- and Latino-owned small businesses. For me, these aren't just economic issues -- they're part of the long, continuing struggle for civil rights.

Rosa Parks opened up every seat on the bus. Now we've got to expand economic opportunity so everyone can afford the fare. And we have to make sure the bus route reaches every neighborhood, and connects families with safe, affordable housing and good jobs.

Sylvia Mendez and Ruby Bridges helped desegregate our schools. Now we've got to help every family afford the books, computers and internet access that our kids need to learn in the 21st century.

And so in my first 100 days as President, we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. That includes jobs in manufacturing, clean energy, technology and innovation, small businesses, and infrastructure. If we invest in infrastructure now, we will not only create jobs today, we will lay the foundation for the jobs of the future.

We're going to also focus on creating jobs in communities where unemployment remains stubbornly high after generations of underinvestment and neglect. I'm a big fan of Congressman Jim Clyburn's "10-20-30' plan -- steering 10 percent of federal investment to neighborhoods where 20 percent of the population has been living below the poverty line for 30 years. We need that kind of focused, targeted investment -- in urban places, rural places -- wherever Americans have been left out and left behind.

We're also going to invest $20 billion in creating jobs for young people. There's a big gap here. The unemployment rate among Latino and African American youth is significantly higher than for whites. You know, it's hard to write a resume if you have nothing to put on it. We're going to help young people get that first job, so they can get that second job, so they can build a good solid middle-class life that will give them and their families a better future.

We're going to do more to help black and Latino entrepreneurs get access to capital, so they have a real chance at turning their ideas into thriving businesses. Now I think that's not only good for those entrepreneurs -- it's good for their families, their workers, and their communities.

Additionally, as part of our end-to-end reform of the criminal justice system, we're going to help people succeed when they return home from jail or prison. We're going to ban the box so they can be judged by their skills and talents, not by their past. And we will dedicate $5 billion to provide training and support to returning citizens so they can get good-paying jobs.

And in my first 100 days, I'm going to introduce legislation for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship -- that's not only the right thing to do. Every independent analysis shows it will add hundreds of billions of dollars to our economy. It will also keep families together. We need to bring hard-working people out of the shadows. America has always been a place where people from around the world work hard and apply their talents to American growth and innovation in pursuit of their own dreams. So we're going to do everything we can to get this done.

We need to build an economy and a future that every American can be proud of and be a part of. An economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. That will be my mission as President.

These are just the highlights of our plan. I hope you'll go to my website, hillaryclinton.com to read the details, including how we're going to pay for everything I've proposed.

And of course I hope you'll compare that to what my opponent is talking about.

Here's one measure that you could use for that comparison: an independent economist recently calculated that, if my agenda for jobs and growth is put into place, our economy would create at least 10.4 million jobs within four years. We actually think it could be much more than that.

Now this economist also ran the numbers on Donald Trump, including his disastrous and inhumane plan to round up and deport millions of hard-working immigrants. The result, according to Mark Zandi, who was the economic advisor to John McCain during his 2008 run for the presidency, the result of Trump's plans would be a "lengthy recession' with 3.4 million jobs lost.

Now of course, Trump's problems go far beyond economics. At every turn, he stokes division and resentment. He says horrible things about one group of Americans after another. He's harkening back to the most shameful chapters of our history and appealing to the ugliest impulses of our society.

You know the list, you've reported on it. He started his campaign by describing Mexican immigrants as "criminals' and "rapists.' He retweets white nationalists. He says a distinguished judge can't be trusted because he is of Mexican heritage. He talks about banning Muslims from coming to the United States -- a land built on religious freedom. And yes, he also talks about curtailing press freedom as well.

We need to stand up as a country, and say Donald Trump doesn't represent who we are and what we believe. That is what my campaign, what Tim Kaine and I, and everyone supporting us, is doing every day. And we're going to keep at it. Because I believe with all my heart that America is better than this. America is better than Donald Trump.

We just launched an all-Spanish Twitter account, because we want to bring as many Americans as possible into this conversation. We've opened offices in every state, because we want to compete everywhere -- we want to bring our message and our vision to all corners of our country.

But we can't do it alone. Everyone -- Republican, Democrat, and independent -- needs to stand up and speak out. And I think journalists have a special responsibility to our democracy in a time like this. As Ida B. Wells once said, "people must know before they can act, and there is no educator to compare to the press.'

Many of you are showing the way. It's a badge of honor when Jorge Ramos gets thrown out of a press conference for challenging Donald Trump. Or when another news organization gets banned for reporting what he says. As Jorge said, the best journalism happens when you take a stand, when you denounce injustice.

So I hope you'll keep calling it like you see it. Keep holding all of us accountable. I have laid out all these plans, and I'm well aware that I have been sometimes made fun of for putting out these plans about the economy and education and gun safety measures and all the rest of it. But I have this old fashioned idea that when you run for President, you ought to tell the voters of America what you would do as President. So I am going to keep telling you what I'm going to do because I want you to hold me accountable, press and citizens alike.

Because the stakes are as high as they've ever been in our lifetimes. And we all have to do our part.

So thank you for what you do everyday, thank you for inviting me to address you today. And I look forward to taking some of your questions today. Thank you all very much."

"Thank you. Thank you so much. I am so happy to be back here and to be with all of you right here at the home of IBEW Local 357. And with so many longtime friends. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Let me, in addition to thanking IBEW, let me thank all of the union members here. The Nevada State AFL-CIO. Everyone who knows what it is to work hard and deserves a chance to get ahead and stay ahead. Thank you. And particularly I want to thank Al Davis, manager and financial secretary of IBEW. And I want to thank United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters Local 525 who assisted with parking for this event too, so thanks.

Now you just heard from your longtime senator and someone who has lead the Senate in the majority and the minority with such tenacity, such focus, getting things done for the people of this state and America. There's a lot that I really love and admire about Harry Reid. Let me just mention three of them. Number one: his wife Landra and the beautiful family that they have created together.

Number two: He always tells it as he sees it. He's not a man of many words, but when he uses them he's very clear about what he's trying to accomplish and why he thinks it will help people. He's been a champion of working people and every one of the interests that stands for the kind of America that Harry and I believe in. We both feel very fortunate, and we want to make sure everybody has the same opportunities.

And number three: in the Senate he was a master of getting things done from the other side, whether they wanted to do it or not. And I know how hard that was. I was in the Senate for eight years with Harry. And before that I was First Lady and watching what he did as a senator and then of course I was Secretary of State.

He worked tirelessly everyday, but he also had a vision about what needed to happen. I'll just mention one thing that he mentioned. Harry Reid is one of the leaders in America for clean renewable energy.

At a time some years ago when a lot of folks didn't really know what that meant. Harry was holding a conference every year, bringing people together to talk about how we can get more solar and wind and geothermal, how we create more jobs because of that. And I will have more to say about it, but I think the progress that you've made here in Nevada and the progress we're making across America owes a great deal to the leadership of Senator Harry Reid.

I also want to thank Congresswoman Dina Titus, she has been a great voice for progress in the Congress, I can't wait to work with her. And I am thrilled at the prospect. It's up to you my friends, but I know you're going to do the right thing to send Catherine Cortez-Masto to the United States Senate.

[] Okay, we'll keep talking, and we'll, and apparently these people are here to protest Trump, because Trump and his kids have killed a lot of animals, so thank you for making that point. So let me keep going, because I want to say another word about Catherine. She will be the first Latina ever elected to the United States Senate. So here is what I hope I can do with Catherine and Dina, with Jacky and Ruben, with other members of the House and the Senate. We are going to create more good jobs with rising incomes, we are going to have the biggest investment in new jobs that we've had since World War II.

Now how are we going to do that? Well number one, we are going to do exactly what Harry said. We are going to have an investment in infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports. But it's not only what you can see, it's also under the ground. The water systems, the sewer systems, and yes, we need a new, modern, electric grid to be able to take and distribute all the clean renewable energy.

So I'm excited about this because, as Harry just said, for every billion dollars we get 47,500 jobs, and they are mostly good union jobs with a good middle class income.

We are also going to do everything we can to assist unions and everything they represent to be able to organize and bargain collectively. I am sick and tired of leaders in this country trying to bust unions like Donald Trump did here in Las Vegas.

I just came from an excellent business. A business, Mojave. That's right, Mojave Electric, right. That's a company that understands they could do well by doing good. It's an IBEW union shop. It has a lot of apprentices. It has benefits that are going to keep families together and keep them growing. That's what we need more of in America, and I'm on the side of businesses and labor that work together. The other thing I saw at Mojave is that we need more skills training for more Americans, and that includes apprenticeships programs. Mojave working with the IBEW working with electrical contractors takes the time to actually train people, and I met some of those apprentices and those journeymen and women, and they are so proud of what they do. And I want more people in America to have that kind of opportunity. I'll tell you something folks don't know. More than half of all jobs in 2020, and that's not long from now, will not require a four year education.

So here's how I'm fitting all the pieces together. I want to make college affordable, in fact, I want to make it debt-free. I want to help people who already have debts and the families that are burdened by those debts to be able to pay them back at a lower interest rate and have them forgiven after a certain period of time. It makes no sense to me that Donald Trump can take bankruptcy six times, get out from under his debts, and we don't let families and students refinance their college debts. But I think it's really important that we do more like what I saw at Mojave today. I want to give every business a $1,500 tax credit if they will train apprentices, and not for free, pay these apprentices while they're getting trained so more people can take advantage of that opportunity.

We need more technical education back into our high schools. I want us to train 50,000 high school teachers and junior high teachers in computer science so everyone single student in America has access to that kind of opportunity.

And we're going to -- we're going to, with our infrastructure program, finish the job of providing high-speed broadband Internet access to every single home and business in America. I was talking to some teachers the other day, and I love teachers, I love teachers. And I was talking to them, and they were telling me they had just done a national survey and they found that 70 percent of teachers assigned homework that required students to go use the Internet. Now I think that's good. We want our young people to learn how to use the Internet and understand the opportunities that they could have, but here's the rub: 5 million students in America do not have access at home to the Internet.

So, the homework gets assigned and these 5 million kids, unless they're close enough to a library they can get to, or somebody's business, or somebody else's home is connected somehow, they're left out. We do not have a single person to waste in the 21st century. I want to unleash the talent and ambition of every young American. So we're going to give more high-school kids the chance to do real work, to get credit toward graduation. We're going to make community college free, so that high-school students and everybody else can get two-year degrees and credentials. Because already today we have a big gap -- we have about a million jobs that are not being filled around America. There are jobs for machinists, and tool and dye makers, and coders and lots of other skills.

We have a lot of unions that I've been talking to over the past year and a half who are seeing their workforce get older. Well, we can't afford that. We need to invest in our young people and give them different paths beside four-year college to get ahead in America. That should be the basic bargain. Now --

In addition to jobs from infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, I've seen a couple of examples of that over the last week in Ohio, Pennsylvania. I saw a small business in Denver yesterday where they're making homemade ties and scarves. And I was real interested in that because Donald Trump said that he can't make his suits, or his ties, or his shirts, or his furniture in the United States. Well, we just put a website, hillaryclinton.com/makeithere, and we're telling him about 100 places where he can actually make all of those things right here in America.

And then -- then I have to tell you, he talks a lot about how he's going to grow the economy. Yet, he doesn't make things in America and just this past couple of weeks he asked for more visas to bring in foreign workers for his golf courses and his resorts. And when asked, "Why would you do that?' He said, "Well, we can't find workers here.' He really thinks he's going to get away with this. And then there's the way that he's treated small business. I want to be a small business president. I want to help more small businesses get started, and grow, and create jobs here in Nevada and across America.

But I have now been hearing stories from so many people who did work for Donald Trump and one of his buildings, and then they wouldn't pay him. I went to Atlantic City, and I met a number of small businesses, as well as workers, plumbers and painters, glass installers, marble installers. At one of his resorts, they finished the work, the man who sold him the pianos and installed the pianos, they finished the work, and they submitted their bill. And the Trump people said, "No, we're not going to pay you.' Not because he couldn't, but because he wouldn't.

And then he comes back and he says, "Well, maybe I'll give you 50 cents or 30 cents on the dollar.' Now, I've got to tell you, I take this really personally. My father was a small businessman, and he printed fabric for drapes. That's what he did. He had a print plant. It was a low-ceiling, dark place with two long tables and you'd roll the fabric out on it, then you would take a silk screen and you'd put it down, you'd pour the paint in, you'd take the squeegee, you'd go from left to right, then you'd lift it up and you would do it again, all the way down that table, the next table, until you finished doing it. And then my dad would load the fabric up in his car and he would drive it to who ever had ordered it. I can't image if he had shown up at some place that Trump owned and they said, "Well, thanks a lot but we are not paying you.' Actually, that happened here in Las Vegas.

He refused to pay nearly $400,000 to a local Nevada drapery company which had to close its factory. Four hundred thousand dollar order for a small business is huge. And so I do, I take it personally. Small business is the backbone of our economy. That's where most of the jobs come from. We should be honoring people who take the risk and put in the hard work and the sweat to build their small businesses.

I also was disturbed when we learned some months ago that during the terrible housing crisis -- and no place was affected more than right here in Clark County, was it? Nobody. And I remember because in '08 I walked some of those streets and some of those neighborhoods and I met with people who were on the brink of or having been foreclosed. And it was heartbreaking. And we still have work to do.

But what did Donald Trump say when all of this began to happen? Well he basically said, "Hey this is good for me. I can go buy. I can make money.' Didn't matter the heartbreak. 5 million homes were lost. $13 trillion in family wealth was lost, mostly homes. And what was Donald Trump doing? He was thinking about himself. So you have got to ask yourself in this campaign, do you want a president who stands for "You're fired' or one who stands for "You're hired?'

So the bottom line, which I think is becoming clearer everyday, is that Donald Trump is not qualified to be President, and he is temperamentally unfit to be Commander-in-Chief. I said it Thursday night at the Democratic Convention, anyone you can provoke with a tweet should not be anywhere near nuclear weapons.

But I have to agree, as I usually do, with Harry. We cannot take anything, anybody, or anyplace for granted. We have work to do. And I need your help, I need you to be part of this campaign. We are going to be registering voters, if you know -- that's right, we have a young woman right there, if you're not registered and you're eligible as an American citizen, please go sign up. And back there as well.

We are trying, across the country, to register 3 million more voters and turn them out in November. We are also going to do everything we can to reach out to our friends and our neighbors across this state and across America, answer their questions. Somebody wants to be for Trump because they're anxious, they're fearful, maybe they're angry because there's a lot to be concerned about. We need to talk. We need to talk because we don't want you being sold the same bill of goods that the students who signed up to go to Trump University were sold.

We don't want you to be left in the same position as the retirees in Florida were that put their money up for Trump condos, and there was never any built, and they didn't get their money back. We don't want you to think any businessperson can get away with your doing the work and then not getting paid for it. We don't want you to support somebody who doesn't support American workers and American businesses, and doesn't seem to understand we are stronger together in America.

Now, I will do everything I can in this campaign to tell you what I will try to do as your President. And here's why. You know, I've been talking about my plans for jobs and education and healthcare and all the rest of the agenda for some months now. And I admit, some people have made fun of that, they go "Oh my gosh, there she goes with another plan.'

But here's what I believe. If I'm asking you to vote for me, for president, then I want you to know what I'm going to try to do as your president starting next January 20th. And I want you to hold me accountable. I'll be back here. And I'm going to be talking, I want to have a dialogue with the American people. Not just during the election, but afterwards and for those four years because I think there are a lot of good ideas that Americans have. That I want to hear about. And I'll tell you something else, I want to be the president of all Americans. Democrats, Republicans, Independents, young, old, everybody in between.

Because I think this election comes down to economic opportunity, national security, and American unity. And I'm going to work to make sure we pull together, we get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. We keep our country safe, we work with our friends and allies, we don't insult them, we join together to get rid of the threats that we face, and that we're going to pull America together again. That doesn't mean we all have to agree. No two Americans agree a hundred percent, on anything, that's part of our DNA, right? But we've got to work together.

That's why I applaud and salute Harry's years of service. He got up every day working for you, making a difference for you. And I'm going to miss not working with him directly as he gets to leave and come home to the state that he loves. But Harry, you better pick up the phone when I call, because I need your advice about how we're going to do everything we need to. So my friends, let's join together for these next 96 days. Let's make sure we win Nevada and America and build the future that we all deserve. Thank you and God bless you."

"It's great to be here with your governor. I am such a fan of Governor Hickenlooper for a lot of reasons, but one of the main reasons is because he does understand how we could create more jobs, and what's happened here in Colorado under his leadership proves that. And he has used his own experience as a small businessman who grew a business and was successful not to turn his back on what it took but to try to help more people get the tools they need to start those businesses, to grow those businesses. And what a stark contrast with Donald Trump who has spent his career stiffing small businesses, refusing to pay his bills to small businesses.

And I got to tell you, I take that really personally. My father was a small businessman, I mean really small nothing as successful as the governor's enterprises he printed fabrics to turn them into draperies and it was hard work. And I cannot imagine what it would have been like for my dad who stood at that long table and took a silk screen and put it down and then put paint into it, then took a squeegee and went across and then lifted it up and went down and went down over and over again and finally got the fabric printed, and then folded it up, and then loaded it into his car to take it to where it had been ordered from whether it was a restaurant, a hotel, any other business, an office building. I cannot image what that would have felt like for my father, a Navy veteran, a chief petty officer during World War II to have done his part, to have fulfilled his contract and then be told we're not going to pay you.

Now, when I first started hearing those stories about small businesses, I thought, well, maybe it happened once or twice. But no, my friends, it happened over and over again. Donald Trump would not pay people who did work, painters and plumbers and glass installers and marble installers and architects. We now have a very long list. What kind of man does business by hurting other people? I am just so, so determined that we are not going to let him do to America what he has done to so many other people.

I want to also recognize your congressman, Congressman Ed Perlmutter. Thank you, Ed, for being here. I want to thank your principal of this great high school, principal Thompson. Thank you. And I want to thank a great man from Colorado, someone I had the distinct honor of serving with in the United States Senate and then serving with in the Obama Administration, and that is Ken Salazar. I'll tell you, you will not find a better person, someone who is always thinking about what he can do to help somebody else, and I for one am grateful for his friendship.

Now, when I think about our convention last week did any of you see it? Well, what we tried to do was to make clear that we're not satisfied with where we are in the country, but we think we know how to make progress together. We think we can put into effect a jobs program that will create millions of new jobs with rising incomes, and here's what we're going to do. We're going to have the biggest infrastructure investment program since World War II. And if you look, our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems, they're all in need. They all should be repaired. We have people who are driving long distances and spending hundreds and hundreds of dollars every year because of problems with the potholes or with the lack of maintenance. We have people scared about the bridges in their counties. They don't have much choice, but they shouldn't have to worry about whether they can get across or not. So we're going to make investments that will make America grow our economy, put people to work, and position us better to actually be competitive around the world. But there's a lot of infrastructure that you can't necessarily see that we want to work on. We need a modern electric grid that can take clean, renewable energy and distribute it everywhere across America.

And here's the other thing we need. We need to connect every community, no matter how isolated, how rural, how inner-city poor, no matter where it is, every community needs to be connected to broadband internet access.

This is a competitive issue. How are we going to help small businesses that don't have access? When I was in Pennsylvania a few days ago and I said that, I had a man tell me afterwards, he said, "Well, you have no idea how bad it is in rural parts of Pennsylvania. We still have dial up, and a lot of time that doesn't even work.' And then I told folks that I'd been talking to some teachers you know I love teachers and I'm going to support our teachers. But here is what the teachers told me. They said there had recently been a national survey asking teachers about different things they do in the classroom and the like, and 70 percent of teachers said that they assign homework to their students that requires the students to go on the internet. Now, I think that's great because we want our kids to be ready for the jobs of the future and that means they've got to understand how to learn and find information. But here's the rub: 5 million kids in America don't have access to internet in their homes. So you know what? We are leaving those kids behind while they're still in elementary and secondary schools. That is wrong. We're going to make sure America, which invented the internet, is the most connected country in the world.

And here's what else we're going to do: I'm going to support advanced manufacturing, manufacturing of all kinds. Because I believe that we've got a real opportunity to bring manufacturing back. I visited a place called Johnstown Wire Technologies in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. They started more than 100 years ago as a steel mill. Now they're making all kinds of wire products, and they're starting to bring jobs back from China to do that work in America.

Now, when Donald Trump is asked about where he makes things, he makes them anywhere else but America. His ties, his suits, his shirts, his furniture, his barware made all over the world. Bangladesh, Turkey, Slovenia, Mexico. And when asked about that, he said, well, we don't make that stuff in America. Well, I'm here to tell you: Donald, you're wrong.

And here's how I know. I know he's wrong because I've been collecting information and visiting places that actually do make these things in America. Just today I went to the Knotty Tie Company. And I met folks living right here in Denver who are making ties and scarves. I hope you like this one because I got it at Knotty just a few hours ago. I just got interviewed by one of the local newscasters, and first thing he said to me he didn't even know this was from Knotty he said, "That's a beautiful scarf.' He said, "That looks like it's got Colorado colors.' And in fact, one thing I really like about it, is printed right here on the scarf, it says "made in Colorado, not China.'

So I got so into this that we now have a website went public today called hillaryclinton.com/makeithere. And you can go on the website and you can see about 100 places around America where Donald could have made ties, shirts, suits, furniture, barware, right here in America. And I hope that more people will start making things here in America again.

So we are going to work to grow the economy, and I look often at Denver and Colorado as examples. And it's another one of the reasons why I admire your governor the transit system in Denver combined with the new airport connecting not only Denver to the airport, but other places in the region, is growing this economy. And very importantly, it's attracting a lot of young people who want to be able to quickly move from work to home to entertainment and everything else.

So we see this happening in lots of places. And so when people say to me, "Hey, we can't do that in America,' I say, "I don't know which America you've been looking at.' In fact, I couldn't figure out what country the Republican convention was talking about. A negative, pessimistic view of America that is not who we are. Do we have challenges? Sure. But can we meet them? Absolutely. We are truly stronger together, and that's what we're going to be doing. Now in addition to growing the economy, we've got to make it fairer. And I feel very strongly about this. We've got to make this economy work for everybody, not just those at the top.

So we are going to make these investments. We are going to invest more in education, starting with preschool education. We are going to train 50,000 teachers so that they can teach computer science in junior high and high school. We are going to make college debt free so that everybody can afford to go. And we're going to make community college free so you can get the skills you need for the jobs of today and tomorrow.

And I want to say something really serious about this. John and I have talked about this a lot. Look, I think it's great; everybody who wants to go to college should be able to afford to go to college. Anybody with student debt we're going to help you refinance the debt, because in America, if Donald Trump can plead bankruptcy six times and refinance his debts, American students and families ought to be able to refinance their debts.

But my friends, I do not believe that a four-year college education is the only path that we should have to a good job with a rising standard of living. That's why I want more technical education back in our high schools. That's why I want more apprenticeship programs in business and unions. I get very excited about this, because there are more than a million jobs right now waiting to be filled, by machinists and tool and die makers, by people with real skills coders who can get a good job. When I was at Johnstown Wire Technology, it's a unionized plant. U.S. Steelworkers represent that plant's workers. And they get some people already trained, and then the union and management train others. And the average salary is over $70,000 a year. We are also going to raise the national minimum wage because no one who works full-time should still be living in poverty. And I'll tell you the fastest way we can raise incomes in America is to guarantee equal pay for women's work. And I am very I'm encouraged. When I started talking about this more than a year ago, I could see kind of quizzical looks out in the audience. And then I realized I've got to explain this is not just a woman's issue. If you have a working mother, wife, daughter, or sister, it's your issue.

You see, I get pretty excited about what we're going to do. I believe with all my heart that America's best years are still ahead of us. Now, that doesn't mean that I think it's going to be easy. But I know we're up to the job. I just know we are. I have no doubt about that. And we're also up to the responsibility of leading the world toward peace and prosperity as well. There is no doubt in my mind that Donald Trump is unqualified to be president and unfit to be commander-in-chief. Anyone who spends his time insulting our military, demeaning the service of our POWs and our fallen soldiers, insulting Gold Star families, this is not someone who understands the honor, the duty of serving America. I am so grateful to every single person who has ever put on the uniform of the United States military. And it worries me, some of what I hear him say. I mean, anyone who can be provoked by a tweet should not be anywhere near nuclear weapons.

And I want to I want to say a special word about something that's important here in Colorado. It's important in the West. And that is we have a responsibility to protect our public lands in America. The outdoor economy, the recreational economy is so important to so many places here in Colorado and elsewhere throughout the West. And I couldn't believe that Trump has basically gone along with what they put into the Republican platform that would disrupt and take back public lands that are really held in trust for all of us. So I want you to know as president, I will defend and protect America's public lands and our conservation.

So we're really having a good time in this campaign. And we want everybody to join. I said in my speech on Thursday night I want to be the president for all Americans: Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. I want to work for the struggling, the striving, and the successful. I want more people to be lifted up to follow their own dreams. So here's what I hope you will do. I hope you will join our campaign. And here in Colorado, if you text C-O to 47246, you can get involved or go to our website at hillaryclinton.com. And we are hiring organizers here in Colorado.

We are also setting a goal of registering three million more American citizens to vote in November. So make sure you're registered. Look for your mail ballot in October. And talk to your friends, your neighbors, your colleagues.

I believe that we are at a crossroads election. I've laid out the best I could, the specific plans and ideas that I want to pursue as your president because I have this old-fashioned idea. When you run for president, you ought to tell people what you want to do as their president. And I have also told you because I want you to hold me accountable. I will get up every single day and work hard for you and fight for you. And I will fight to preserve our rights, whether they are civil rights or human rights or women's rights or gay rights or voters' rights or workers' rights. And I will take on the gun lobby for common sense gun safety reform.

One of the one of the things I said Thursday night, which I will repeat here because I want you to know this, I do not want to repeal the Second Amendment. I do not want to take anyone's gun away. I just don't want you to get shot by somebody who shouldn't have a gun in the first place.

So we've got great work to do, and I'm excited about doing it with you because I do want you to know what I want to do as your president, to weigh that. It's like a big job interview. You're hearing from two people that you might hire. And I, frankly, think it's better for us to have an economy where you hear "You're hired,' instead of "You're fired.'

So, Colorado, let's get to work. Let's win in November. And let's make sure we build an American future that we all could be part of. Thank you, and God bless you."

"Thank you. Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Thank you. Thank you. I think you've made it pretty clear who you've come to hear, so I'll --In just a minute, I'm going to talk about my favorite subject, which is going to be what Hillary can and will do in the eight years following January 20th. But before that, there have been a couple of things said by Donald Trump in the last few weeks that I now, wait till you hear them, then you'll really boo.

So I'd like to clarify a little bit, and these are important points to be made and it's important that you hear the answer on them.

The first point was when he was asked about revealing his income tax returns, which every presidential candidate has done for 40 years. He said, "None of your business,' which did not go over so well. And then he started giving various explanations, and one of the explanations was that he had given his financial statement to the Election Commission, they're listed as assets and liabilities. But believe me, as someone who's filled out financial statements and someone who's filled out an income tax return, I can tell you they are two very different animals. And you will learn a whole lot more about Donald Trump if he produces his income tax return.

And so that's why I'd like to make him an offer an offer I hope he can't refuse. Donald Trump at one point he says various things at different times, but at one point, and I think he said it several times he said he can't do it, can't release it because he's under audit. Now, I've got news for him: I'm under audit too. And I would be delighted to meet him anyplace, anytime between now and election. I will bring my tax return; he can bring his tax return. Nobody's going to arrest us. It is not there are no rules against showing your tax returns. And just let people ask us questions about the items that are on there.

How many of you would be afraid to have your tax return made public? Yeah, it is not no, no. You're only afraid if you've got something to be afraid about. And you're not he's not afraid because of what of the IRS. He's afraid because of you. So I will meet him in Omaha, or Mar-a-Lago, or he can pick the place anytime between now and election. I'll bring my return; he'll bring his return. We're both under audit. And believe me, nobody's going to stop us from talking about what's on those returns. And send the word to him, if you will.

Now, the another thing he said is he says America isn't great anymore. You know, you need him. But because America just isn't great anymore. Now, everybody is entitled to their opinion. I disagree with him violently on that subject, which I'll say a little bit about more later. But it's how he explains what he would do about that, because I'm going to quote his exact words I'm going to read this because I want to be sure I've got it exactly right. He says, "No one knows the system better than me, which is why I alone can fix it.' Well, la-dee-da. You know? I mean, this is only he can fix it. I didn't really realize we were in such grave danger. I mean, there's 325 million Americans, and if this guy leaves for Canada, it's supposed to be hopeless for the rest of us. No, he alone can fix it. It takes some kind of nerve, or something else, to really have the notion that out of 325 million people, you're the only one who can fix it.

Now, I think when somebody makes a statement like that, you should look at his record when he has appealed to the American public before. Now, Donald Trump has been in a lot of businesses, he's had a lot of bankruptcies, but usually that's just involved borrowing money from the American public. But in 1995 to my knowledge it's the only time Donald Trump went to the American people and he said, "Join me 'm a winner. Join me and invest in my company,' Trump hotels and casino resorts. It's the only time he asked the public to join, but now you got a chance to join the great man in this investment. That was in 1995. They listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and Mr. Trump very modestly made the ticker symbol DJT. Guess what that's for? So he names the company after himself, or he gets the ticker symbol after himself. In the next 10 years, the company loses money every year every single year. The he takes out $44 million in compensation during that period.

If you in 1995, when he offered this company, if a monkey had thrown a dart at the stock page, the monkey on average would have made 150 percent. But the people that believed in him, that listened to his siren song, came away losing well over 90 cents on the dollar. They got back less than a dime. And you know the history of his enterprises where he was borrowing money where one time after another, he went into bankruptcy. I've really never known another businessman that brags about his bankruptcies. I mean, and itto tell you the truth, why not? I mean, it's his claim to stardom. I don't know anybody else that's had six bankruptcies, but there he is.

Now, the final straw occurred this weekend, and you know about it. Donald Trump managed to get in front of George Stephanopoulos after Mr. and Mrs. Khan had told about their Gold Star son, and Mr. Khan had offered him a Mr. Trump a copy of the Constitution. And Donald Trump said this when asked by George Stephanopoulos about --"Well, Mr. Khan first said you have sacrificed nothing and no one.' Quite an accurate statement. And Trump said, "I think I've made a lot of sacrifices. I've worked very, very hard. I've created thousands of jobs, tens of thousands of jobs, built great structures. I've had tremendous success.' And George, a little overcome, said, "Those are sacrifices?' And Trump, believe it or not, said, "Oh, sure. I think they're sacrifices.'

Now, the young son of Mr. and Mrs. Khan died a dozen or so years ago. In that dozen of years, we've employed a lot of people. I've had fun doing it. We've made money just like Donald Trump has made. I have made no sacrifice. No member of my family has gone no member of the Buffett family has gone to Iraq or Afghanistan. No member of the Trump family has gone to Iraq or Afghanistan. We've both done extremely well during this period, and our families haven't sacrificed anything, and Donald Trump and I haven't sacrificed anything. But how in the world can you stand up to a couple of parents who have lost a son and talked about sacrificing because you were building a bunch of buildings?

I mean, that is when I heard that, my mind went back and this goes back before most of you were born but they went back to the McCarthy hearings. And at the time of the McCarthy hearings at the time of the Senate McCarthy hearings with the Army, Joe Welch had a young assistant of his maligned by Senator McCarthy, and McCarthy went on and on, and implying this guy was a communist and doing all kinds of things. And finally Joe Welch couldn't take it anymore and he said, and I'll quote him, "Have you no sense of decency, sir?' And I ask Donald Trump, have you no sense of decency, sir?

I might add I'd just add one thing. McCarthy's career went straight downhill after that.

Let's move on to more pleasant subjects. Unlike what Mr. Trump says, America is great. Yes. So let's talk about the USA. Because 240 years ago, we started with a piece of paper. It was a blueprint for a new society a society unlike anything the world had ever seen before. And in 1776, that blueprint started us on a path that has finally led to the next woman president. It was imperfect, but it was aspirational.

Now, that blueprint has done wonders for this country in terms of overall prosperity. When I was born in 1930, if my parents had seen what the world would look like in 2016, they wouldn't have believed it. The GDP per capita is six times what it was when I was born. That's never happened in the history of mankind. It's a miracle. And the miracle is America. And it still has all the qualities that it had in 1930, and which propelled us forward like this.

So America, in terms of delivering wealth, has been incredible. In terms of distributing wealth, it has not been living up to what I consider its potential. I just described to you $56,000 of GDP per capita, and that means a family of four, on average, would have $224,000 of GDP per capita. But it hasn't worked out that way. This country, while making some people enormously wealthy, has left people behind. And those people were just a willing, probably more willing, to go to Afghanistan.

And in Hillary Clinton, you have somebody that cares about that. Let me give you just one more statistic and I'll get away from that. I know how popular that is. But in the first year of the Forbes 400 back in the 1980s, the aggregate wealth of the 400 was $93 billion. You can look it up on the internet. Currently, it's $2,374,000,000. That's 25 for 1. Now, I'd like everybody that's had 25 for 1 themselves, if they'd raise their hand. Yeah. It hasn't happened. They told us it would trickle down. Yeah.

But what has happened what has happened is it's flooded upward. And that almost $2.4 trillion, from 400 people in this country, they're not bad people. I know a good many of them. I'd like to know more, actually. But they have benefitted from the system that, frankly, tilted toward people like me and the rest of that group. I mean, it's not because they're evil, but they've taken advantage. They're the ones with the lobbyists. They're the ones that come up with carried interest where their income is taxed at rates far lower than almost all of the people in this room.

And it's going to take somebody with strength, resoluteness, brains, energy it's going to take that to somebody to effect change. I mean, there's no question about that. It won't happen by itself. It takes guts. It is a tough, tough job when you try and change the code on people that are making millions and billions of dollars a year in order to give a better break to the people who work just as hard, maybe harder, and take home a few hundred dollars a week. It's really wrong that in a country where there's $56,000 of GDP per person for anybody that works 40 hours a week not to be able to rely on a decent living for their family. It just doesn't make any sense.

And it won't cure itself, and it certainly won't be cured with Donald Trump. It's going to take Hillary Clinton. It's going to take powers of persuasion. It's going to take a mandate from the people in their election. But she's spelling out what she's going to do, as contrasted to one of the other candidates. She is telling you what she is going to do about the tax code. And when that gets enacted, I'll be a little worse off, and believe me, I can take it. And you'll be better off.

Now I'd like to make a little news. And this is a surprise even to Hillary. It's very easy there were 129 million votes cast in the last presidential election. It's very easy to think, if you're watching a TV show or the weather's a little bad or something, to think, well, my vote really doesn't count. What difference is it going to make with 129 million? Well, I've got some real news for you. It doesn't make much difference if you're a Democrat in Idaho or a Republican in California. I mean, you are in a state where the electoral vote's going to be decided by majority vote, and you're on the short side in that case.

But we live in a very special place. In Nebraska and Maine, we also cast electoral votes by congressional district, and we don't have to think about 129 million popular votes throughout the country; we have to think about 538 electoral votes. And yesterday on that same George Stephanopoulos show they had four people predicting how the election would come out. And Jonathan Karl of ABC News had gone state by state and come up with he came up with his notion as to who was going to carry each state and how that would cause the electoral vote to come out. And those of you who watched the show yesterday saw that he came out 269 to 269. He absolutely said that he did not try to come out that way, he just looked state by state 269 to 269. Now, there's one district in the United States I am looking at the people that can change that 269 to 270. It happened in 2008 by 3,200 or 3,325 votes by this. We actually gave a vote separate than the rest of Nebraska. So it's been done. It's been done.

But we're going to help that process along this time. I have pledged today that on Election Day, November 8th, I will take at least 10 people to the polls who would otherwise have difficulty getting there. And when you go home tonight, you can go to a website called Drive2 that's for the 2nd Congressional District, it's the number 2 Drive2Vote, and if you go there, it will offer you information on three things: how to register; how, if you need a ride on November 8th, you may find someone who will take you, will take care of that; and it'll also give you the chance to volunteer to take some people, whether it's 10 or a lesser number. Today, I reserved Ollie the Trolley for November 8th. It seats 32. I'm going to be on it all day. I'm going to do selfies whatever it takes. And if it's snowing, if it's cold, my goal and the goal of the people who've joined me on this in this drive to vote my goal is to have the turnout in Douglas-Sarpy Counties, the 2nd District, is to have the turnout here be the highest percentage of potential voters of any district in the country. Let's Let's give America a civics lesson. How about it? Everybody in the 2nd District, yeah? And if the people in this room, each one of you would pledge to take 10 people, that I can almost guarantee that'll be the march of the victory.

So join me. If you can take 20, do that. If you can only take three or four, that's fine too. But get that neighbor who is watching that television program or [] and shame him into coming with you to the polls. Now, just remember, Drive2Vote. Okay.

Now, if you've read the Constitution, which apparently some people haven't if you read Article II, it deals with the presidency. Article II of the Constitution, look it up. That's where they describe the presidency. We wrote that Constitution; 39 men signed it. How would you ever guess? You'll find out in a minute. Thirty-nine men signed it, and in Article II, describing the qualifications for the president of the United States, male pronouns --"he,' "his' and "him' were used 20 times. Just imagine that. And it's still in the Constitution 227 years later. "He,' "his' and "him.' No "hers,' no "shes.' Well, on January 20th, we're going to elect the best president we've ever had, and somebody is going to change those pronouns: Hillary Rodham Clinton!"

HILLARY CLINTON:

"Wow! Thank you. Thank you all so much. Wow. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Omaha. Thank you. Thank you, Congressional District 2. I am so delighted to be back here with so many friends and supporters, and with everyone here today. And especially, I want to thank Warren Buffett for that kind and generous introduction. I've heard Warren called the Omaha Oracle. I call him my friend. He is an American original. I am honored to have his support, and I love the idea that together all of you are going to aim to have the highest percentage turnout of any congressional district in America.

It's great to be here at the North High School the Magnet School. I had a chance to say hello to your principal, Gene Haynes. And I see scattered throughout the crowd both students and teachers, and I love teachers. Thank you. I also wanted to thank a former colleague of mine in the United States Senate, your former Senator, Ben Nelson. I have to tell you, I've had the best week. Any of you watch the convention? I was so excited to have the opportunity for so many people who care about our country, who have contributed in many different ways, to have a chance to stand before America, and to tell their stories. Because America is story after story. And what I want is to provide the opportunity and the support so that every single American can live his or her best story, can make the most of your own God-given potential.

And after the convention was over, starting Friday morning, Tim Kaine and his wonderful wife Anne and Bill and I got on a bus and started traveling across Pennsylvania, into Ohio; we visited factories, small towns, bigger cities. We met with so many hard-working people who told us their stories. And they proved every day that Donald Trump is wrong. America is not weak. I agree with Warren. This is the greatest nation on earth, and our best days are still ahead of us.

Now, that doesn't mean we don't have challenges and problems. Of course we do. Right here at home and around the world. But I don't believe there is anything that Americans can't do if we make up our minds, because, you know why? We are stronger together. But as Warren said, too many people haven't gotten a raise since the great crash. There's too much inequality and too little opportunity. Washington is paralyzed by special interests and big money. But don't let anyone tell you we don't have what it takes if we make up our minds to solve our problems. And don't believe anyone who tells you, "I alone can fix it.'

When Donald Trump said that in his convention speech, I did a bit of a mental double take. I listened to that speech, 75 minutes of it, and it was like he was talking about a different country. Forgetting about everyone in America who gets up every day and works together. People who make a difference every single day. He's forgetting our troops on the front lines, he's forgetting police officers and firefighters who run toward danger. He's forgetting about doctors and nurses who save lives, and teachers who change lives. He's forgetting about unions who fight for working families, and communities that pull together through hard times.

I grew up in the Midwest. I was born in Chicago, raised outside of Chicago. My dad was a small businessman. I mean, really small. It was mostly just him and occasionally my mother, my brothers, and me. And sometimes he'd hire helpers to get one of his orders out, because he printed fabrics to be made into draperies. And he had a print plant with long tables. He was a very self-reliant man. But I don't think he, for a minute, through his growing up in Scranton, Pennsylvania, through his service as a chief petty officer in the Navy, through his work in business or his raising our family, ever thought to himself, "I alone can fix it.'

That's just not the way we were raised. We were raised to get together. We were raised to follow up on the extraordinary example of our founders 240 years ago, in Philadelphia, who came together. You see that across Nebraska. You see people working. I've been in Omaha. I have visited projects, schools, other kinds of nonprofits and institutions where people are working together. That's what we do in America. We see a problem and we say, "We'll fix it together.' And that's what we're going to do when we get the White House to move us forward in the direction we need to go.

Now, I know how hard the great recession was. It was a terrible time. The worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. And people in Nebraska worked hard to come back. I think it was a terrible moment. It could've gotten even worse. I believe that a lot of difficult decisions had to be made. And we have come back from that terrible financial crisis. Thanks to the hard work of Nebraskans, Americans, and President Obama, we got out of the ditch we were in. So I think if we're going to solve the problems we have, we ought to be really clear about where we've come from. We now have 15 million new jobs that have been created in the last 7 ½ years. We now have 20 million more Americans who have access to healthcare. We have the highest percentage ever in our history of young people walking across graduation stages to get their high school diplomas.

So I know we've made progress, but I know we shouldn't be satisfied. As Americans, we always have to be asking ourselves, what can we do better? How can we make more progress? How can we help more people? We're still facing tough challenges that developed long before the recession, and they've stayed with us. The economy is not working the way it should for everyone. Starting in Iowa back in April 2015, until the convention this week, I have met so many people who tell me, you know, they don't expect a handout. They don't even expect, you know, life to be easy. But they don't think it should be this hard.

It shouldn't be that people feel like they're out there on their own, like no one cares about them, that they're not respected. That the dignity of their job is not something that we all support. I know a lot of people who feel that way. I bet there are some in this gymnasium who feel that way. Well, here's what I want you to know: You deserve a president who will get up every single day in the White House and do everything she can to give you the chance you deserve to have.

And I will quickly add, as important as it is to have someone who gets what you're going through, I think it's also really important that that person tells you what her plans are for producing results. So if you saw what I said on Thursday night, let me give you the short, punchier version. And it starts by making clear, we do have to rewrite the rules so that our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top. My overriding mission as president will be to do everything I can to help our country create more jobs with rising income. I believe anyone willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family.

So in my first 100 days, we are going to break through the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. We are going to make the boldest investment in American infrastructure since the highway system. Warren read you some of the quotes from Donald Trump. Well, he has said so many things that I profoundly, vehemently disagree with. And for the life of me, I don't know why someone runs to be president of the United States who thinks and says, we never win anymore. Our country is full of losers. Well, he could not be more wrong. We are going to fix and build the roads, the bridges, the tunnels, the ports, the airports, the water systems we need.

And I want to say a particular word to any of you here from rural Nebraska. We're going to bring diverse economic development to rural communities to support our farmers and others in small towns who keep America going. And one specific way we will do that is to make sure we have an electric grid that can take and distribute energy from clean, renewable sources. In fact, I know, because I've seen them in the crowd, there are a few people from Iowa here today. And your neighbor Iowa is already getting one third of its electricity from clean energy, primarily wind energy. And what I love about that is, they're also giving farmers extra income for hosting the turbines on their farm, and they are taking abandoned factories and actually assembling the wind turbines, putting people to work in Iowa to produce the energy in Iowa.

The other thing we're going to do is finish the job of building out broadband so everybody in America, no matter where you live, has access to the Internet. I don't know how we build a 21st-century economy for our young people if we don't give every home and business access to high-speed Internet connectivity. And I learned something from talking to some of my teacher friends as I said, I do love teachers, and I'm going to work with you to support you.

And here's what they told me. They told me that a recent survey found 70 percent of our teachers give homework assignments to their students that require them to use the Internet. Now, that makes perfect sense. We want to have a really great opportunity for young people to understand how to be involved with and use the Internet. But here's the rub. We have 5 million kids in America who don't have access to the Internet in their homes. So already they're being left out and left behind. We don't have a child to waste. We need every child to be given an education to prepare them for the future.

So, to me, it's real simple. If we invest in infrastructure, we're going to put millions of people to work, and we're going to lay the foundation for new jobs in the future. The second thing we're going to do is invest in American manufacturing. And here's why. A lot of people say, you know, we can't make things in America anymore. And they think about all of the jobs we've lost because of low wage labor and other problems. Well, here's what I have seen and I've seen it all over America I was just in a plant in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. A wire plant called Johnstown Wire Technologies.

And I was talking it's a plant that's been there more than 100 years. Started off as a steel plant. Now it's making wire products. And I was talking to them, and I said, well, what kind of future do you think you have? And they said, boy, if we get the right support, we've got a great future. We're actually bringing jobs back from China to Johnstown, Pennsylvania. When I was your Secretary of State, I visited 112 countries, and I went to a lot of places that really want American-made products. They're the best, the most innovative. Nobody can outwork or outcompete American workers or American businesses.

So what I want to do I want to support manufacturers, large and small. And again, I hear Trump talking a big game about I think he says, putting America first. Well, I don't know what part of "America first' leads him to make Trump furniture in Turkey, not Nebraska. Or Trump ties in China, not Colorado. Or Trump barware in Slovenia, not Ohio. He says he wants to make America great again. Well, he could start by actually making things in America again.

And then just this week we find out he's asking for permission to get visas to bring more foreign workers, which he has used consistently, to work in his country clubs, on his golf courses. And he was asked, I think, on that same interview Warren was talking about he goes, oh, well, it's very hard to find people. Well, I bet together we could find thousands of people who would like to work at a country club or on a golf course in America.

We're also going to take seriously the education and training of our young people, and people in midcareer. We're going to invest in STEM education, which is part of the mission here. I want us to provide to every student in America the chance to learn computer science like you're doing here at OmahaNorth High School. We are going to partner with the private sector to train up to 50,000 computer science teachers over the next decade, so they're in the classroom preparing our young people. We're also going to make college tuition free for the middle class, and debt-free for everybody.

And we will liberate millions of people who already have student debt. It is just not fair that Donald Trump takes bankruptcy six times to get out from under his debts, and we won't let families and students refinance their student debt. And here's something else. I don't think we say this enough. College is crucial, but a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America. Right now, there are millions of job openings. We don't have enough machinists or welders or coders. We need more skilled people in the trades because a lot of the people who know how to do that work are going to be retiring in the next 10 or 15 years. That's why I want to support more business and union apprenticeship initiatives, targeted higher education programs, more training. We're going to help people build a better future.

And, finally, we are going to support the kind of small businesses that Donald Trump has consistently stiffed. Like I said, my dad was a very small businessman. I take this really personally. I had no idea before he started running and information began coming to light what he has done to hurt people. I said in the convention Atlantic City, New Jersey, hardworking contractors, small businesses, were left holding the bag after Trump refused to pay their bills. I'm talking about painters, landscapers, plumbers, the people who installed the glass in his casino, the people who laid the marble floor in his casino. They needed the money. They did the work. They bought the supplies. And he didn't pay them, not because he couldn't but because he wouldn't. That is just not the way you do business in America. We make good on our promises.

Well, I think about my dad standing over those big bolts of fabric. You take a silkscreen. You put it down. You pour paint in it. You take a squeegee. You go from one side to the other. Then you lift it up, and you keep going down the table. Then maybe you come back, and you add another color with a different silkscreen. And then, finally, you finish.

My dad would get contracts. He would do the work. Then he would load the fabrics into his car, and he would take them to the places that had ordered them: hotels, offices, restaurants. And he expected to be paid. If one of his major customers had refused, he would have been forced to close up his business. Luckily, he never had a contract with Donald Trump. If you hire someone to do a job and they do it, you pay them. You don't go around bullying small businesses just because you can.

Small businesses are the backbone of this economy. And I want to be a small business president. We're going to make it easier to give credit, to cut red tape. Too many dreams still die in the parking lots of banks in America. If you can dream it, you should be able to build it.

I also will tell you exactly how I'm going to pay for everything I have proposed. If you go to my website, hillaryclinton.com, you can see. It's not complicated. It's exactly what Warren said, "Follow the money.' And I'm glad I'm glad Warren is so good-humored about it because the super-rich, Wall Street and corporations, are going to start paying their fair share for supporting the United States of America. And this is not because this is not because we resent success. We welcome success as long as you do it fairly and don't abuse people on the way up. But 90 percent of the income gains have gone to the wealthiest 1 percent in America. Our tax code is full of loopholes and special breaks that make it even worse.

And what I really appreciate about Warren is he has said and he has said it consistently he should never be able to pay a lower tax rate than his secretary. And he is right. So I have said I am going to follow Warren's example. Being successful doesn't have to come at the expense of others. He knows that real value comes from helping more people invest in themselves. Their businesses grow the economy. And so we're going to use him and his ideas about how we're going to tax the wealthy more as the real foundation of making the investments in America that will help everybody.

Now, I don't 'm told that Donald Trump stays glued to the TV set. So I hope he heard Warren. There's always there's always time for a conversion because while Warren is standing up for a fairer tax code, Trump wants to cut taxes for the super-rich. Well, we're not going there, my friends. I'm telling you right now we're going to write fairer rules for the middle class, and we aren't going to raise taxes on the middle class.

And while we're at it, we would like to see those tax returns, wouldn't we? My husband and I have put out I think about 33 or 34 years' worth if you're interested. He doesn't even respect the American people enough to do what every other presidential candidate has done for decades and release them. It's time for Trump to stop hiding. It's time to stand up for working families. It's time to make clear that when the middle class thrives, America thrives. And that's what we're going to get back to doing.

So, my friends, I will not rest until we get wages and incomes rising. I will not rest until we make it clear what's at stake in this election. And that's why I need your help. I just want to I want to throw into the challenge that Warren made if this congressional district has the highest percentage of votes in any congressional district and, of course, if I win, here's what we'll do. I will shortly after I become president, sometime as soon as I can arrange it, come back here. And Warren and I will dance [] together. And maybe if we're really lucky, he'll wear his Elvis costume again.

Please join this campaign. Text JOIN, J-O-I-N. Go to 47246. Go to hillaryclinton.com. And, oh, by the way, we are hiring organizers in Nebraska. So let's have some fun. Let's register voters. Let's turn people out. And let's win this election for America's future. Thank you."

"Hello, Columbus. Wow. Man, we have had an intense week, and we roll up here, as tired as we can be, and you just gave us a shot of energy. Whew. This is so cool. This is so cool.

Hey, let me do let me do a couple of thank-yous. I want to thank Roger Teeters, who just did the introduction, proud Vietnam vet, proud Vietnam vet. I think one thing we showed this week in Philadelphia is what a patriotic, upbeat, optimistic, pro-America party we are in the Democratic Party. And you guys show us the great beauty of our country.

Wasn't Philadelphia so different than that dark and twisted convention that the Republicans put on the week before? I know we've got the mayor here and Congresswoman and Governor Strickland, who is going to be a fantastic U.S. Senator. Give them a round of applause. And I really mean that, what we said about Philadelphia. I know we felt that the hospitality there was great, that the spirit of our Democratic family was great. And it was such a contrast with that, kind of the dark, twisted vision that Donald Trump says is America, but, really, it's just a tour through Donald Trump's head. And, folks, that's a scary place to be, scary place to be.

But we've had a great three-day bus tour. We get on the ticket. We do the convention. We hop on this bus tour through Pennsylvania and Ohio, talking about job creation, talking about Hillary Clinton's plans and what we'll do in her administration. This is the last stop on the tour. And it's great to finish strong in Columbus.

I want to introduce you to my wife, Anne Holton, who is my wife of 32 years. We're proud parents of three. She was the Secretary of Education in Virginia until last Monday. After I was asked by Secretary Clinton to be a running mate, Anne walked in and said, "I want to campaign full-time for this ticket.' She stepped down from her position. And having her on the road with me makes me a very happy warrior. She is a great public servant.

And then we've also had the great benefit up until the events this morning of having another travel buddy during the bus tour, President Bill Clinton. Now, that's pretty cool. That's pretty cool. I said yesterday that I've been in politics for 22 years. Mr. Mayor, I was a city councilman and mayor before I was a governor and senator, started at the local level. I thought I knew something about politics after 22 years, but spending about 15 minutes on a bus with Bill Clinton, you realize, man, now, there's a guy who knows some things about politics. It was really exciting for Anne and I to be on this tour."

AUDIENCE MEMBER: "You're going to be our next VP, Tim."

TIM KAINE: "Thank you. Thank you.

But I will also say I just I am so proud to be on this ticket. I am proud I am proud that Hillary Clinton, out of a number of spectacular people who could have been her running mate, asked, "Tim, will you do this with me?' I'm so humbled about it. I'm so excited to work with somebody who, as President Obama said the other night, has got to be the best qualified person to be a nominee for President of the United States in a very long time.

So I'm proud and we're having fun, but I'll just go one more reason that I'm excited about this. One more reason I'm excited to say a couple things about the race and out opponent, and then introduce Hillary Clinton. This is a historic election. This is a historic nomination. And I was standing on the podium Thursday night after Hillary did her acceptance speech and the balloons started falling. My 81-year-old mother and my wife were standing there with me. My mom Kathy put her arms on my shoulders and said, "This is the happiest moment of my life.' "Of my life.'

Now, there was a lot of reasons she was saying that, but I'll tell you one of the reasons is this: because we were making history not just by nominating the best-qualified major party nominee in a very long time if ever, but we were also nominating that the first woman to be president. And here's what I thought of, here's what I thought of: How many strong women have helped me in 22 years in politics, been campaign managers for me, campaign staffers, volunteers, member of my cabinet, supporting me, so that I could have a great political career, my wife supporting me so I could have a great political career, just like I've supported her in her public service career.

But if you look at that whole arc of American history, how many strong women have stood behind strong men leaders? I think it's time for the strong men of America to show that we can stand up and support a strong woman president of this country, of this country. Now "

AUDIENCE: "Hillary, Hillary, Hillary!"

TIM KAINE: "Hillary!"

AUDIENCE: "Hillary, Hillary, Hillary, Hillary!"

TIM KAINE: "Can I be honest and just tell you the one bad thing about this week? I mean, I've got to be honest. Before I was on the ticket, Donald Trump didn't have any reason to call me a name. So when I got on the ticket, he had to figure out how to call me a name. So the morning after I became the nominee he did a press conference, and he took a mike and he said that Tim Kaine, he was a really lousy governor of New Jersey.

Now, I'm a sensitive guy; I don't like criticism. And so I kind of felt bad until I realized, wait a minute, I was never governor of New Jersey. I've never even lived in New Jersey.

But look, guys, give Donald a break; he's new to this. He's new to this. You know the basic civics, there's 50 states and Virginia is different than New Jersey. I'm sure that's in the briefing book a few pages later, he's not there yet.

Look, we're on this tour and we're having fun, but it's about something real serious, which is about the American economy and how to grow it, because Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have real different plans. I like making things simple so I'm going to make it simple. Would you rather have a "You're fired' president or a "You're hired' president? I thought so. I thought so. And I predict this: After Donald Trump loses this race, and after everybody has forgotten virtually everything about his candidacy, the one thing people will remember about Donald Trump is two words: "You're fired.' "You're fired.'

Hillary has is going to be a "You're hired' president and she's going to talk a little bit about what we've been both talking about and learning about on the trail with factory stops and rallies. The American economy was in a freefall at the end of the Bush administration. President Obama has pulled it out, and we're climbing again. But we got a long way to go. We got a long way to go because we need to grow jobs and make sure that the growth is not just for a few, but that the growth is shared by all. And so to do that, Hillary's got a very dynamic plan about how to grow our economy and grow it for all.

It involves skills training. It involves major investment in advanced manufacturing. It involves infrastructure. It involves debt-free college so people can get the skills that they need to be successful. It involves things that should be just basic, like raising the federal minimum wage so you can't work full-time and be below the poverty level. And it also means making sure that women are entitled to equal pay for equal work.

Now, these are the basics of the Hillary Clinton "You're hired' plan. And guess what? She is respectful enough of y'all I don't know, do you use that in Columbus? Yeah, okay. Am I okay? She is respectful enough of the voters to share the details. You go on hillaryclinton.com. One click of a mouse, you can see how she'll do it, how she'll pay for it, how she'll benefit. Right? And she said this the other night at the convention. I liked this line. She said, "I'm going to give you the details.' Some people criticize the details. "Oh, I don't want to know about the details.' But here's what she said. "If it's about your kid, if it's about your family, if it's about your business, it ain't a detail. It's a big deal. It's a big deal.' And she's going to share the plan.

Go over to the other side of the aisle. Donald Trump? No plans, folks. No plans. I mean, he talked for 75 minutes at the convention, criticized Hillary Clinton, and made a lot of big, broad claims without any substance behind them. In fact, if you ask Donald a question, he'll say, "I'm going to create jobs,' or, "We're going to all be rich,' or, "We're going to beat ISIS,' or, "We're going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it.' And you ask him, "Well, how are you going to do any of those things?' And he just says, "Believe me.' "Believe me.' Huh. "Believe me. Believe me.'

But here's the problem. A lot of people have believed Donald Trump and gotten stiffed, gotten hurt, gotten there's a lot of stories of contractors. Hillary Clinton and I both grew up in families where our dads ran small businesses. Her dad ran a drape and fabric-printing factory, and my dad ran an ironworker-organized welding shop. And so we're used to businesses. A whole lot of small businesses have done deals with Donald Trump to help him build golf courses, build casinos, et cetera, only to get stiffed after the job was done. They did the work. They were entitled to the pay. But Donald and his phalanx of lawyers said, "We're not paying you. Sue us. We'll run you into the ground. Even if you win, you'll pay so much in lawyers' fees it won't be worth anything.' They got hurt, and many of them lost their businesses because they believed Donald Trump.

Retirees in Florida, hundreds of them, gave Trump money to build them condos, and they never go the condos, and they never got the money. They got burned and lost part of their savings because they believed Donald Trump. Students I know. Hey, look, Columbus is a big town for students. Right? Big town for college. So young people like vets and others who wanted to advance, Donald Trump said, "Hey, give me a bunch of dough and be part of my Trump University. And then I'll just guarantee you'll have a path paid for success in your life.' And they gave him a lot of money, and they ended up with a certificate that wasn't even worth the paper it was written on. They got ripped off all because they believed Donald Trump.

And so now he's just saying, "Oh, I'll do all these things, believe me,' but we are just too great a nation to believe a guy who's ripped off virtually everybody he's come in contact with. We cannot put a nation as great as the United States in the hands of an empty-promising, self-promoting, one-man wrecking crew. We just can't do it, folks. We just can't do it.

And so I want to ask you a question, and I hope you'll ask everybody this question, and that is this: When Donald Trump says, "Believe me,' does anybody here I mean even come close to believing this guy? I mean, do you believe even one word of what he says? That's my attitude. Not one word. Not one word, folks. Not one word. And that's what we've got to do on this trail, convince others that they shouldn't be so gullible to fall for Trump's no-details promises, either.

Okay. Look. Now it is my great pleasure. We've had fun on these couple of days. And I hope you'll keep us in your thoughts and encouragement and prayers. It's 100 days to Election Day. And Anne and I get the virtue of just joining with like 105 days left. Now, this has been like an 18-month or multi-year effort on Hillary Clinton's side. But it's going to be tough. It's going to be challenging. But nothing important in life is meant to be easy. And Democrats know tough, folks, and Ohioans know tough.

So let me introduce to a great leader, a tough leader, a compassionate leader, and the next president of the United States, my friend Hillary Clinton.

HILLARY CLINTON:

Hello, Columbus. I am just so happy to be here on this absolutely glorious, beautiful Ohio afternoon. And I am so glad to be making this journey with Senator Tim Kaine and Anne Holton because they understand what public service is all about. They are committed to doing everything they can as Tim has, starting on city council, mayor, lieutenant governor, governor, and now senator to give people the best chance they can to get ahead and stay ahead. So please join me again in thanking Senator Tim Kaine.

And Mayor Ginther, we're happy to be here in your beautiful capital city here in Columbus. And I don't know how you all felt, but boy, I thought your congresswoman really knocked it out of the park at the convention. I haven't even had time to tell Joyce this, but I think it might have been on the very first night she was sitting in the box with my husband, sitting right next to him. And all of a sudden, Twitter was going crazy, "Who is that beautiful, well-dressed, elegant woman sitting next to Bill Clinton?' And finally, somebody says, "That's the congresswoman from Ohio,' and I was so proud to have her support.

Now, there's somebody else with us, somebody very special to us, somebody special to Ohio, your former governor, Ted Strickland. I've had the great privilege of knowing Ted for decades. I've seen how hard he has worked. He got dealt a bad hand being governor during the Republican-generated Great Recession and doing everything he could to try to help Ohio and get through that. Well, now he's running to represent you in the Senate. I think your other great senator, Sherrod Brown, deserves a partner. Every time Sherrod stands up and fights for you, he needs a partner to do the same and not have his vote canceled out. So do everything you can to send Ted Strickland to the Senate in November.

Tim's right; we've had a great time. How many of you watched the convention? I was so proud to see Democrats standing up and speaking about what we can do together to make sure the economy works for everyone, not just those at the top, taking on the special interests that have benefited from a system that is rigged in their favor.

So when we finished those four days, I was thrilled to get on that bus in Philadelphia and head out across Pennsylvania and into Ohio. And along the way, we stopped at factories, where hardworking Americans are still making things. We stopped at a factory in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, where business and management works with the steel workers who are there represented by their union fighting hard to have more good jobs. They told me how they are bringing jobs back from China, how they're creating more opportunity.

That's the American story that we're going to be telling during this campaign during these last 100 days. I have specific plans about how we're going to get the economy working for everybody. We are going to make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II and put millions of Americans to work.

And here's how we're going to do it: We're going to invest in infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. But not just what you can physically see; we need a new electric grid to be able to take and distribute all the clean renewable energy we're going to be producing.

And we need to finish the job of connecting every home and business in America to high-speed broadband internet access. I talk a lot about building our economy, getting jobs for everyone. Well, it's a little heartbreaking to learn, as I did when I was talking to some teachers a few days ago and I love teachers and the teachers told me they had just had a national survey done, and learned that 70 percent of the teachers in America assign homework to their students that required kids to go on the internet.

Now, that makes sense. We're living in the information age. We want more people, particularly young people, to help create that future so we have even more opportunities. But here's the problem: 5 million kids in America don't have access at home to high-speed internet. So already they're being left behind. So we've got to build America's competition, build America's opportunities, and the plans that we've laid out will do just that.

I also believe we need to do more for small business. 98 percent of the businesses in Ohio are small businesses. Let's have greater access to credit. Let's be sure we cut through and eliminate any of the red tape and the other obstacles. You heard Tim say his dad ran a small business. So did mine. My father ran a print plant where fabrics were printed with designs for draperies. I was there helping him, but I know how hard he worked. And I am personally sickened when I hear the stories about Donald Trump refusing to pay plumbers and painters and marble installers and glass installers and small businesses who have done the work.

I think about my dad. He worked hard. What would have happened if the customers he had, after he printed those drapery fabrics, made them into draperies, loaded them into his car, delivered them, helped to install them, and somebody like Donald Trump said, "We're not paying you?' My dad would have said, "What do you mean? I did was I was contracted to do.' But to person after person and business after business, Donald Trump said, "I don't care.' It's not because he couldn't pay them. He wouldn't pay them. He drove businesses into bankruptcy in addition to taking bankruptcy himself six times. My friends, that's not how we do business in America. If you do the work, you deserve the pay. And we're going to stand up and make that case against Donald Trump.

The other thing about Trump ;you've heard him he says, "America first.' Sounds real, doesn't it? As if we wouldn't put America first. That's sure what I believe. He says it. But then everything he makes, he makes somewhere else. He makes dress shirts in China, not Brooklyn, New York. He makes furniture in Turkey, not Cleveland, Ohio. He makes barware in Slovenia, not Jackson, Ohio. And he goes around saying he wants to put America first and American workers first.

And then just today we learn, once again, he's asked for visas to employ foreign workers at his country clubs because he says he can't find any American workers. Shame on you, Donald Trump. Shame on you. Let's cut through all of the hype and the rhetoric and understand that we're dealing with somebody who has a history of stiffing people, making things somewhere else besides America, and whenever possible, hiring foreign workers. I don't think that adds up in any way to making America great again. I think it adds up to making Donald Trump more money, that's what it's all about.

So we're not only going to grow the economy and create more jobs for American workers we are going to make the economy fairer. We are going to raise the minimum wage so that nobody who works full-time will be in poverty. And you've heard it before, but I'll say it again: The fastest way to raise incomes in America is to pay women equal pay for the work we do. Now, this is not just a woman's issue. This is a family issue. If you've got a working mother, wife, sister, or daughter, it's your issue. And we are going to enforce the laws and finally make it absolutely clear: No more discrimination against women who work in the workplace.

So I know we're up against some powerful forces, and here's what I want you to know. As you talk to your friends, your neighbors, about this election, everything I've proposed and you can go to hillaryclinton.com and read all about it I've told you how I will pay for it. How will I pay for it? I will pay for everything I've proposed by making the wealthy corporations and Wall Street finally pay their fair share of taxes. Somebody asked me, well, why are you doing that? Do you resent success?

No, I don't resent success. I do resent people taking advantage of other people to try to become successful. But the reason we're going to get the wealthy to pay is that's where the money is. They have earned 90 percent of all of the income gains since the recession. That's the top 1 percent. And I just think, like that old movie says, you've got to follow the money. And the money is with the super-wealthy.

Now, we're also going to do more for education, starting with preschool education. We're going to support our teachers in order to give them what they need to do the job we're asking them to do. We are going to make four-year college affordable by making it debt-free. And we're going to help those of you who have student debt pay it back at a lower interest rate, at a faster timetable. And if you do public service like teaching, policing, firefighting, social work, we will forgive your debt. This seems to me also to be fair. Donald Trump gets to refinance and forgive his debts. Well, what about the families and students of America who get to have some help with their debts? So if you vote for us, that's exactly what we're going to do next year.

So there's a big agenda, and I watched what's happened over the last two weeks. A lot of the rhetoric that came from Trump and his convention was so dark, so pessimistic, so negative. I know we've got problems and challenges. I'm not taking a position that we don't have work to do. In fact, I'm telling you what work we can do together. But at the end of the day, we Americans are better when we roll up our sleeves, we set some goals, and we work together, because yes, we are stronger together.

And I am very excited about what we can do. You see, I view this campaign as a giant job interview. I am here telling you what I want to achieve, asking for your vote, and asking you also to hold me accountable. I want you not just to vote for me in November but help me be the best president I can be for all Americans. I want to be the president for every American. And that's why today Tim and I and Anne are here, because we are kicking off this campaign in Ohio.

And yes, we have a lot of other issues that we are concerned about. I see some of the t-shirts and the signs. We will defend Planned Parenthood from these outrageous attacks. We will defend and improve benefits under Social Security. We will take on the gun lobby for comprehensive gun safety reforms. We will take on the real challenges that confront America, not pick fights with people, not act as though some folks are better than others, not insult and finger-point. We're going to stand up for Americans' rights: for women's rights and gay rights and voting rights and workers' rights.

But we can't do any of this without your help. And I'm asking for it. We need you to get involved in the campaign. And right now, if you will text JOIN, J-O-I-N, at 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com, you can find out how to get involved. And, by the way, we are hiring organizers in Ohio if you're interested in being part of our campaign staff because at the end of this election, I want people to have made an informed choice. I don't want folks to be misled, to listen to the rhetoric and the demagoguery.

I personally think that Donald Trump poses a serious threat to our democracy. And it's going to be up to all of us to repudiate the hatefulness, attacks on distinguished military leaders, like General John Allen, who came to the Democratic Convention because he loves a country that he served for more than 40 years and wanted to be clear about what he thought was best for our national security, or insulting the family of a fallen soldier, Captain Khan, an American Muslim who sacrificed his life to protect his unit and other soldiers as a taxi raced toward the gates of a base containing a bomb.

When his father spoke at the convention and pulled out a copy of the Constitution, it was so fitting that happened in Philadelphia, where our country started 240 years ago. They enshrined in our Constitution the principle of religious liberty. They understood that America would be including and attracting people from all over the world. George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, they addressed different religions, including Islam, that were present in America way back at our beginning. And I want us always to stand for freedom and equality and justice and opportunity now and forever. Help us go out and win an election that will keep our democracy strong, our economy growing, and give every American a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential.

Thank you so much, Columbus."

"Hey, Pittsburgh! You guys look great! One of the hard things about being the VP nominee is they make you follow Mark Cuban. I mean, that guy is great. Give it up for your native. Give it up for your homeboy.

I am so happy to be here in Pittsburgh. I'm Tim Kaine, Senator of Virginia, and I am so proud that Hillary Clinton has asked me to be her running mate in a race where we're going to make history for this country, and then after November 8 when we win, we're going to make history every day by doing great things for Americans. Give it up for Hillary Clinton!

And I've just been doing this little bus tour for the last couple days with Hillary Clinton and President Clinton and my wife Anne. You know, it's just a regular week in the Kaine household. We have been having a spectacular time. And I just can't tell you how proud I am to be on this stage with Hillary, with President Clinton, and my wife Anne.

I've had a blessed life. Grew up in a manufacturing household. My dad ran an organized ironworking shop in the stockyards of Kansas City. I was a missionary in Honduras, civil rights lawyer for 17 years in Richmond, Virginia, and then I was a city councilman and mayor. I honor all the elected officials here tonight, especially our local guys ;city councilmen, mayors, members of county commissions. If you're doing work at the local level, you understand folks' heart. And I give all of these folks here great praise. We got a great cheering section behind.

And I'll just say one other thing about what an honor it is for me. I encouraged Hillary Clinton in April of 2014, "Please get in and run for president in 2016.' And I did that because I knew it would be a challenging time and she would be the best-qualified person to be president of this country, absolutely.

But I was also struck as we stood on the stage in Philadelphia and I'll tell you, Pennsylvania showed a lot of hospitality, did a great job at the convention. As I stood on the stage at that history-making moment, when the balloons were falling and we realized that a major party had nominated a woman to be president for the first time in the history of this nation, and I thought about every strong woman who has supported me during my life and during 22 years and eight electoral campaigns, including my fantastic wife Anne, Virginia's former Secretary of Education. And I realized this is an election that can not only make history for the country and do good things, but it gives every strong man in this country to show that they can support strong women leadership just as much as strong women have supported us for hundreds of years.

Only one bad thing has happened to me since I got on this ticket, folks, and I'm just going to be honest. As soon as I was part of the ticket, Donald Trump had to figure out a name to call me. I'd been skating under the radar. He wasn't saying anything about me. And then I end up being on the ticket, and I take the nomination, and he gives a press conference the next morning and he said that Tim Kaine was a lousy governor of New Jersey. I mean, when you're super-sensitive like me, I kind of felt bad. But then I realized, wait a minute. I never was governor of New Jersey. I've never lived in New Jersey. But look, you got to give Donald Trump a break. He's new at this the civics, the 50 states. New Jersey is different than Virginia. I mean, come on. What do you expect? What do you expect?

So here's the deal. We're on this bus tour through Pennsylvania and Ohio to talk about how to create an economy that is going to grow and that's going to provide opportunities for all, not just for a few. And Mark, the way you said it you're not going to inspire entrepreneurs and grow jobs by terrifying people; you're going to do it by inspiring people. I mean, it can't be put any better than that. It can't be put any better than that.

And if you boil it all down between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, it comes down to a pretty simple question. A pretty simple question. Do you want a "You're fired' president or a "You're hired' president? I mean, we know Donald Trump is the "You're fired' guy, and long after this campaign is over and after he's lost and after we've forgotten everything about the Trump campaign, we will remember these two words, "You're fired.' We will remember those two words.

But what's so great about Hillary is she's laid it out in pretty clear detail, this is what I want to do to get this economy growing, and growing for all. And you're going to hear her talk about that. It's growing the skills so that there can be these great new entrepreneurs and great new workers, and making sure that people have the skills, are treated fairly with wages that are fair and benefits that are fair, and pay equity for women, and paid family leave. If we're going to honor workers, we got to have policies that honor workers. Right?

We've got to have a tax code that is fair to workers. We have a tax code now that loves investors and punishes workers. No, you got to have a tax code that I want to love investors, but we got to love workers, too. And you got to have tax reform to do that. Advanced manufacturing research. Infrastructures to build roads and ports and buildings, to hire people, and then raise our platform for success.

You go to hillaryclinton.com, one click, you can find out how she's going to do it all specifically how she'll do it, how she'll pay for it, how we'll benefit. Sometimes people have criticized her for the details, and what she said the other night is really important. She said, "Well, look. Some people, they don't like the details. But if it's your kid or if it's your business, it ain't a detail. It's a big deal.' And that's really important. And that's really important.

Now, I'll just say this about Donald Trump and then I'm going to introduce our next president. So Hillary's got plans. Hillary's got plans. Donald Trump, no plans. Not a single plan. He will tell you, we're all going to be rich, but no plan there. He just says, "Believe me.' "We're going to beat ISIS, believe me.' "We're going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it.' "How you going to do it?' "Believe me.' "Nothing's funny in tax returns, believe me.'

Hey, by the way, does anybody here think there's nothing funny about Donald Trump's tax returns? I mean, does anybody here think Donald Trump has been paying his fair share of taxes? Does anybody here think that Donald Trump has given a lot of money to charity? Does anybody here think Donald Trump should do what every modern presidential candidate has done and release his tax returns so we can make our own decisions?

Well, the problem with the "Believe me' is that there's an awful lot of stories about people who did believe Donald Trump contractors who believed him and never got paid; employees who believed him and saw their jobs outsourced, and they got laid off; students at Trump University, who not only believed him, but put a whole lot of money in his hands, only to end up with a certificate that wasn't worth the paper that it was written on; retirees that believed him, gave him their life savings, bought a condo for retirement, only to get no condo and lose all their money. People have believed Donald Trump, and when people have believed Donald Trump, they've ended up getting hurt.

So when Donald Trump looks you in the face and says, "Believe me,' is there anybody in here who will believe Donald Trump? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. We cannot afford to put a nation as great as ours into the hands of a slick-talking, empty-promising, self-promoting, one-man wrecking crew. We just can't do it. We just can't do it.

So what we have in Hillary Clinton is a seasoned public servant who has gotten results for people her whole life. She's not a "me firster.' She's a "families and kids firster.' And she has battled from long before she got into public office to make a meaningful difference, whether it's getting health care for those who went into the buildings after 9/11 to save the victims of a terrorist attack and making sure she could get health care, or whether it's battling for 8 million American children who have health insurance because of Hillary Clinton. She would never stand up and say, "Believe me.' She believes in you. And together with you, we're going to put a great president in and make history.

Please welcome, a warm welcome, Hillary Clinton."

HILLARY CLINTON:

"Hello, Pittsburgh! Wow! Thank you so much! Thank you! Thank you! Thank you very, very much. Wow! It is so great being back here in Pittsburgh with all of you, and I can't tell you how happy I am to be here with a Pittsburgh native who worked hard for everything that he has made and has helped a lot of people along the way. What he exemplifies is the American Dream, but he understands the dream gets bigger the more you share it. And I want to thank Mark Cuban for being here!

I loved hearing his stories. I especially loved everyone learning what he did when he became successful and sold companies. He shared. He shared the benefits with everybody who helped him be a success. He said, when he sold the company, the second one, for a big, big amount of money, he shared it with everybody, made 300 millionaires, including people who were working at minimum wage, because they helped him be a success. And Mark is right. I want to do what I can to make it possible for more people who help their businesses succeed share in the profits because when we share, we grow. And you know what I believe: We are stronger together, and that's how we're going to make it in America!

Now, I want to thank your elected officials who have been on this pre-program and thank them for their support because I am really looking forward to working with them. They're bringing people together on behalf of Pittsburgh and Allegheny County and Western Pennsylvania. So thanks to Congressman Mike Doyle. Thanks to Mayor Bill Peduto, thanks for Allegheny County Executor Rich Fitzgerald, Councilman Dan Gilman, and Mayor John Fetterman from Braddock PA.

Now, as you heard from Tim Kaine, we are on a bus tour and we are having a great time because you get to drive through Pennsylvania, which really is one of the most beautiful places on Earth and I don't say it because it's the first time I've seen it. My father was born in Scranton, Pennsylvania and every summer of our lives we drove from outside of Chicago where we lived to Scranton. And because we did it every year and a lot of times also during Christmas, we took different routes. So I was in Pittsburgh a lot. And my dad and my brother went to Penn State so I was in State College at lot.

So for me this is really a sentimental tour through Pennsylvania, and it gives me such personal joy because I love this commonwealth and I know that a lot of good things are happening here because people are working together. But we're going to make more good things happen. We're going to have a coordinated, specific set of plans to create more jobs right here in Pennsylvania, to give more people a chance to fulfill their own dreams, to lift up the incomes of hardworking people, to create what I view as an opportunity society, where if you do your part you can get ahead and stay ahead. That's the basic bargain of America and we're going to keep our end of it.

Now, as you heard Tim say, I have laid out plans in this campaign. I have this old-fashioned idea that basically I'm being interviewed to be hired. This is a giant job interview. And I'm hoping I am hired and the other guy is fired. But I'm not asking you I'm not asking you to vote for me just because I show up and just because I tell you you're supposed to believe in me and you're supposed to just count on me to come up with something that I don't tell you about beforehand. I'm not doing that. I'm laying out my plans in this campaign.

And here's what we're going to do. We're going to, in the first 100 days, break through the gridlock in Washington and have the biggest infrastructure and jobs program that we've had since World War II. We're going to be investing in our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. But we're also going to be investing in a new electric grid that can then take advantage and distribute all the new, clean, renewable energy we're going to be producing.

And we're going to do something else. We are going to finish the job of providing high-speed, affordable broadband internet connectivity to every single home and business in America. I was in Harrisburg last night and I told the crowd there beautiful night, place called the Broad Street Market. It was just magical. And I told them we were going to do this on broadband. And then I said I was talking to a bunch of teachers, and they just did a survey, a national survey I love teachers. I could tell you something about every one of my public school teachers starting in kindergarten all the way through 12th grade.

But I was talking to them and they said 70 percent of the teachers in America assign homework to our kids that requires the kids to go on the internet. Now, I think that makes sense. Just like Mark was a pioneer in using the internet to deliver services, we want our kids to know how to use it and how to learn from it. And who knows? They may grow up and follow in Mark's footsteps or whatever the next generation is.

But here's the kicker: 5 million kids in our country don't now have access to the internet in a way that enables them to do the homework they're asked to do. That's 5 million kids who are being left out. And after I finished saying that in Harrisburg I was walking the line, as I will after I talked here, meeting people, shaking hands, and one of the men I met said, "You know, that's only half of it. We still have places in Pennsylvania,' he told me, "where our only option is dial-up.' Right? I see heads nodding. How are we going to be a competitive 21st century economy and take on and win in the world if we can't even get broadband, if we can't even get internet connectivity to every single home and business? And we're going to do that.

Now, in addition to growing the economy we are going to make it fairer. And this is a big deal too, because I want everybody to be lifted up. I want everybody to benefit from their hard work the way Mark has done with his businesses. There's a couple of things we can do at the government level as well as encourage more businesses to follow Mark's example. We can raise the national minimum wage so that more people have a chance to get themselves out of poverty and into the middle class. And we can do more to help small businesses because that is where more of the new jobs are created, so let's do more to get them the credit they need and get rid of the red tape and the bureaucratic obstacles.

But you know the fastest way to raise incomes in America. It's pretty simple. Let's finally guarantee equal pay for women's work. Now, I've got to add, I think most of you know this, but this is not a woman's issue. It isn't. Because here's what I'd ask you: If you have a working mom, wife, sister, or daughter, it's your issue. It's a family issue. And when women are shortchanged, families are shortchanged and the economy is shortchanged.

And the other thing we're going to do, we're going to make sure that we pay for everything I'm proposing, everything from paid family leave to preschool for kids. We're going to make sure we pay for it. Because I want you to know exactly what I'm going to do and exactly how I'm going to pay for it, and I am going to go where the money is. You know that old movie Follow the Money? Well, 90 percent of the income gains have gone to the top 1 percent, so we're going to try to get those who've been successful sorry, Mark we're going to try to get those who have been successful to help us fund what will make America even more successful and create more millionaires and more billionaires, more entrepreneurs, more success stories. You see, I am so excited in part because I've seen what Pittsburgh has done. I told you I used to come to Pittsburgh all the time, so I have had a firsthand look at the way this great American city has reinvented itself. It didn't happen by people insulting each other. It didn't happen by folks pointing fingers and demeaning one another. It happened because people got together and said, "Wait a minute, we love this place.' Right?

So how do we reimagine and reinvent Pittsburgh for the future? Let's not just keep looking backwards. Let's look forwards. How do we create more jobs? How do we bring young people back? During the primary I was at Carnegie Mellon, and I was knocked over by what I saw going on there.

So I get excited. I want us to really believe that America's best years are ahead of us, but to understand the only way we're going to make that a reality is by working together and recognizing that we've got to do more to make sure everybody is brought alone. Education is still the door to opportunity, but it's not just one kind of education. You know I believe we need to start with preschool education, because I want every child prepared to be successful when that child gets to school.

And I want to be sure that in elementary and secondary school we're providing the tools that kids will need to make the most out of their own talents and ambition. And so let's make sure we've got computer science and coding and technology programs in our high schools again.

And I have a plan to make community college free so that more people can get two-year degrees to get a good job.

There are about a million jobs right now that aren't being filled, and a lot of those jobs are in the trades. A lot of those jobs require skills. We are going to have a shortage of machinists and welders and tool-and-die makers, and these are good jobs and I want us to start respecting the work that people do to build America again.

And then we're going to do more with apprenticeship programs. I'm going to offer a tax credit so that businesses will provide apprenticeship programs that will pay, that will pay young people to learn the skills that will give them a path to a new job. And I'm going to support unions that are already providing apprenticeship programs for young people.

And we are going to make public colleges and universities debt-free so that every single young person can afford to go. And then we are going to give you ways to refinance your student debt to get the cost down. It's just not right. Donald Trump gets to take bankruptcy. American families and students get stuck. Well, we're going to change that. We're going to give you a way to pay less because we're going to lower interest rates, pay it as a percentage of your income, put a date certain when your obligations end; and if you do public service like teaching or policing or firefighting, we're going to forgive your college debt.

Now, I'm excited by this because I have seen it work. I know that if we make up our minds and roll up our sleeves, we will create these jobs and we will unleash a whole new generation of entrepreneurs. I want young people to feel like they can start their own businesses, they can take chances. I really appreciated Mark saying, you know what, he didn't succeed 100 percent of the time, I don't know anybody who has. But you learn by trying, and I want to encourage more Americans not just to dream again but try again.

And I want people to know that we can make things in America, because I believe that if we put our minds to it, we can do more in advanced manufacturing, clean energy technology. We can bring back some precision machining from Germany and Japan with a public-private partnership where we work to support manufacturers so that they can be competitive worldwide.

Now, Donald Trump talks a big game about putting America first. But then you actually peel back the story and what do you find? He makes Trump shirts in Bangladesh, not Ashland, Pennsylvania. He makes Trump furniture in Turkey, not Freeburg, Pennsylvania. He makes Trump picture frames in India, not Bristol, Pennsylvania. And I just have to point out, my husband is wearing a shirt that was made right here in Pennsylvania, in Reading Reading, Pennsylvania. And when we were packing for the bus tour and he said, "Well, what am I supposed to wear,' I said, "Well, I don't know. It's sort of bus tour casual.' And so he's going through his closet, and this morning in the hotel in Harrisburg he's putting this shirt on. He goes, "You know what? This shirt was made in Reading, Pennsylvania, and you will not believe this, at a company called "Bill's.'

So we have a very stark choice in this election. It really is about the difference between pulling together, working together, making the future better together, and living with fear and anxiety and the kinds of insults, the bigotry, the blustering and bullying that we're seeing from the other side.

Now, I know because I've had the great experience of observing presidents up close and working for four years for President Obama as Secretary of State and even working with Republican presidents. I may not have agreed with what their positions were, but I will tell you this: I've had the great privilege of observing presidents, listening to them, understanding what they're trying to achieve. And even where our positions diverge, I have never doubted that they were trying to figure out, in their own minds based on their own experiences, what was right for America. We've never had someone run for president who is so manifestly temperamentally unfit and unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief.

And I understand what he's doing. There are a lot of people in our country who are frustrated. They feel like maybe the economy has passed them by, that their government doesn't help them, that nobody is listening to them, nobody cares about them. I get that. That's why I said in my convention speech I want to be a president for all Americans Republicans, independents Democrats, people who vote for me, people who don't vote for me.

Because I think we all are in this together, and I know that if we decide we're going to set some big goals for America, we'll achieve them because that's what we've always done. And so when I think about the next 100 days of this campaign here in Pennsylvania, I will be doing everything I can to reach out and meet as many people as possible. I will go everywhere that Tim and I and Bill and Ann can reach. I will make sure that you know what I stand for, what I want to do, because I want you to hold me accountable. I want you to say, "I came and heard her.'"

AUDIENCE: "Hillary, Hillary, Hillary, Hillary!"

HILLARY CLINTON: "Because I need your ideas not just during the campaign but afterwards. I want us to begin a conversation that keeps going. As president I won't be stuck in the White House. I'm going to be traveling around America having meetings, listening, trying to learn what more we can do.

But I can't get there without your help. I am inviting you to join this campaign. Please, if you will, text JOIN, J-O-I-N, to 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com, sign up, be part of this campaign. And by the way, we are hiring organizers in Allegheny County and across Pennsylvania right now.

I want to end where Mark took us, because as I was backstage listening to him I've watched him on Shark Tank. And I've watched him very respectfully try to figure out how can I help somebody. If I can't, I can't. But if I can, here's what I'd like to do. And I've really admired that, Mark. I really did. Because we've got to have that attitude in our country again. How are we going to help each other, lift each other up, have each other's back? This country is really a place that people dream and build together. With us in Philadelphia were so many wonderful people who told their stories. If you saw them during the convention, you heard the bravery, the determination.

That, to me, is the best of America. Whatever position one holds, whatever kind of background one has, getting up every day trying to make the most out of your own life, trying to get your family to go through barriers and obstacles to make the most out of theirs, reaching out to neighbors, being part of this dream that we all share the American dream is not limited, my friends. The American dream is as big as we make it. And with your help, we're going to make it bigger than ever. Let's go win in November. Thank you and God bless you."

"How you guys doing? So good to be here at Johnstown Wire, and thank you for welcoming us. I want to thank Jim and Ron. And I had a great chance to visit with Nick a little bit, and heard about what you all do. It is a treat for us to bring our bus tour here. You can see my voice has gotten a little hoarse this week. I don't know why. It's not like I've been doing a lot of talking. I want to say a special thanks to Leo Gerard, the head of the steel workers. Leo, it's so good to have you here.

The largest steelworker union in the international, the largest [] local, is in Newport News, Virginia. Local [], which is the manufacturers who build the most complicated things on planet Earth nuclear aircraft carriers and subs. So we're glad to have our steel workers there in Virginia, Leo.

This has been an incredible week. And my wife, Anne, up until a couple of days ago was the Secretary of Education in Virginia, but she stepped down to campaign full time so we can get Hillary Clinton elected President. The week has been amazing, and I'm just really humbled and honored to be part of this ticket. Being asked by a public servant who is as superb as Hillary Clinton, to join her on this ticket and to do good things for the economy, to grow it so that all benefit, to make us strong in the world with stronger alliances to build a community of respect It's deeply humbling.

There has only been one bad thing about being asked to join this ticket. And I'll just be blunt about it. Once I was on the ticket, Donald Trump had to decide how he was going to make fun of me. So he basically decided at a press conference a couple of days ago, it really hurt my feelings, by saying what a lousy governor of New Jersey I had been.

When you work hard in public life, and then somebody trashes your record, you feel bad. I was feeling bad for a few minutes, and I thought, "Wait a minute, I wasn't governor of New Jersey. I've never lived in New Jersey. I was governor of Virginia.' So then I started to feel better. You've got listen, you've got to give the guy a break. He's new at this. He's still getting the briefing memos on 50 states and New Jersey's different than Virginia. So give him time, I guess, give him time. Well, look. I took this nomination a couple of days ago, and I talked about my own background, which makes me feel proud to be here. I was talking to Jim and Ron and Nick as we came in.

I grew up in Kansas City, and my dad ran an iron-worker organized ironworking and welding shop in the stockyards of Kansas City. My mom was his best salesman. My brothers and I worked in a manufacturing business that is pretty similar to this, except a whole lot smaller. Five employees plus family and [], plus family in a good year, but I know the deep importance of manufacturing: the deep importance of cooperation between management and union labor. So that's why I'm so glad to come here today.

And we're on this tour so that we can talk about the American Economy: to talk about manufacturing; to talk about the way to grow jobs and make sure everybody benefits from our economic growth, not just a few. And that's why I admire Hillary so very, very much. She

No, please. please. Hillary also grew up in a small business family. You know, we were comparing notes. The businesses were different, but one thing's the same if you grow up in a small business family. Everybody, it's all hands on deck, just like this campaign.

Everybody comes down and the kids come down. If you've got to get an order or if it's a holiday or a weekend and something is needed, everybody gets pressed into service. And she learned those same values growing up in her family in suburban Chicago and she's been living them for her entire career. And she's got just about the best life partner that you could imagine if you're trying to serve others. Please give a great round of applause to President Clinton.

For all of us on stage and frankly for anybody who's got their values straight, it's not about title, it is not about money, it is not about prestige, it's not about popularity it's about what you can do to help folks out. And that's why I'm so excited to be here on this tour with Hillary, Bill and my wife Anne.

For us to just be sitting on a bus shooting the breeze with Hillary and Bill Clinton I mean, I've got to tell you, I'm still sort of pinching myself. And yesterday we have a boy in the Marines who deployed overseas earlier this week. And we were able to and [] that Nick is a Marine we were able to get him on the phone and talk to our running mates, and man that just blew him away. That's something that he felt so good about many time zones away.

But look, we're here because the convention was great and Pennsylvania did a superb job. We think we know hospitality in Virginia, but Philly and Pennsylvania did a superb job.

But this is the part of the campaign I like best, not in the suit but with the jacket off and with the tie off, just going out and pounding the pavement. 100 days from now and we are pounding the pavement to make sure we win. On this bus tour, which is in Pennsylvania and Ohio, we're talking about creating jobs, raising wages and the leadership that we need to show in order to make that possible.

In this county, you've got 125 to 129 manufacturing businesses just like Johnstown Wire that employ nearly 4,000 people. And Hillary's going to talk at some length about our "Make It in America' plan that will invest $10 billion in communities just like Johnstown.

We'll put workers first, we'll put their wages first, we'll put their families first. We'll reject trade agreements like the TPP that don't meet the standards that they ought to meet.

And we need to do something that has a direct tie to Johnstown Wire's business, which is invest in infrastructure, so that everybody's able to get around. We can have a power grid that works, we've got bridges that are solid, because these kinds of jobs and infrastructure hire people today and raise our platform of economic success down the road.

This way to build the economy so that all benefit is just one of the few issues at stake in the campaign, but it's really the most important one, because if we can build those ladders of success for every community and every industry and every region, then our country's going to be very, very strong.

We saw in Philadelphia this week a united Democratic Party. And look, for Dems that's not always just an automatic. I will just be honest. We came in and there were challenges, because we are a family that doesn't mind airing debates and having robust debates and there were challenges on Monday morning, but by Thursday night, when our candidate hit the stage, took the nomination and laid out her vision for the country, they saw the Democrats pull together behind a relentlessly upbeat and patriotic view of this country, right?

And aren't we all patriots and aren't we all optimists?

I think the vision we put on display was a sharp contrast from the darker and more twisted version that we saw in Cleveland and we like being the upbeat, positive people. We don't sugarcoat stuff, we don't whitewash challenges, but we know we can solve our challenges because of you.

This election, the stakes are very clear and the stakes are very high. It's a choice between a leader who's been working her entire life on behalf of families and children or somebody who's spent his entire life watching out for himself no matter who gets hurt. There's a story that the campaign has told of a guy named Andrew Tesoro who's an architect. You might have seen it there's a video and an ad, and the reason we mention him, he lives in New York but he's been teaching over at Carnegie Mellon, so that's why I wanted to mention him, Donald Trump hired him as an architect to design a clubhouse for one of his golf courses, that was a huge honor to him.

He believed Donald Trump. He believed he could do good work for him, and he did. He honored his part of the bargain, he designed, and they built this clubhouse, this very nice place. But as he so often does, Donald decided, "Hey, I can stiff this guy.' And even told him, "You know what, because you're a nice guy, I'll pay you half.' You know, if he didn't like him, he was going to pay him less than that.

And Andrew couldn't hire the [] lawyers to go after a big machine like the Trump machine. And so I guess he figured, well, I guess, probably can't go after him. So maybe I'll have to settle for half. But after he did that, Trump had second thoughts about paying him half. He bullied this guy, this small business owner, this entrepreneur, he threatened him, he said he'd tie him up in court forever, and so the guy basically had to settle for virtually zip when he had already done all of the work.

He had already paid for all of his work, all of his folks, and all the entire project, and built the clubhouse that Trump gets to take advantage of and enjoy. This was a small business that took a punch because they believed Donald Trump. So when it comes to Trump there is, there are just too many stories like that, I talked about it at the convention the other night, so many people when they believed in him, they found out they got stiffed. And now he's still saying, "Hey folks, believe me.'

We've got a candidate who respects you enough to lay out a plan, here's what I'll do, here's how I'll do it. And I thought when of the best lines that Hillary said the other night was, "I've got details, but remembers when it's about your own kid, or it's about your own business, it's not a detail, it's a big deal, and you ought to have to tell people, what you're going to do.'

But Trump just says, "Look, believe me. Trust me.' And we'd be fools to do it. I can't help but think what would have happened if my dad's business had been trying to do work with seven or eight employees for a guy like Trump, who just felt like he could use them and then just kick them aside, I wouldn't have the opportunities I have today had my Dad dealt with people like that when he was running his iron-working shop.

So the last thing I'll say before I bring up the Secretary is this: Virginia and Pennsylvania share something in common, and that is we call ourselves a commonwealth, not a state. There's 46 states and there are four commonwealths, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Mass, and Virginia. Once when I was Lieutenant Governor I went to a school and I talked to a student just about your age, young lady, standing right in front of me, and I was in a classroom and a little girl asked me, "Hey, why are we a Commonwealth and everybody else is states?'

And I did what a good politician was who doesn't know the answer, I made something up on the spot. And I said, "Commonwealth a state is a dotted line, it's geography, Commonwealth says, it's something about our values.' The wealth we hold, we hold in common, it's got to be about the community. It's got to be about bringing everybody together, and Pennsylvania, you have the boldness to say that's how you want to be known, and in Virginia, we have the boldness to say that's how we want to be known.

That's our values. The wealth we hold, we hold in common, and those are Hillary Clinton's values too. So, I'll just ask you this last question and then bring up our next President. I think as far as it goes with the economy, we've got a really, really clear choice, and I'll boil it down to this: Johnstown, Pennsylvania do you want a "you're fired' President, or a "you're hired' President?

I mean I don't think it could be any simpler, we've got a "you're hired' President in Hillary Clinton, and I'm so proud to be her running mate and I'm so proud to bring her up to talk to you! Hillary Clinton, give her a big round!

HILLARY CLINTON:

Well I'll tell you what, I'm glad I told Tim Kaine, "You're hired,' because you just got a great look at why the people of the Commonwealth of Virginia keep promoting him. He started off in the city council of Richmond, went on to become mayor of his hometown, got elected Lieutenant Governor then Governor, and now United States Senator, because he's someone who really instills confidence in those whom he serves.

And as America gets to know him, that's exactly what I think will happen as well. We've got an incredible week here in Pennsylvania, I can't tell you how much I love being here.

And some of you may know that my father was from Scranton. My grandfather came as a small child from England, immigrant, to Scranton with his family. He worked in the Scranton lace mills, a factory his entire life, because he believed that he could produce a better life for his children, and he did. And every time I come to Pennsylvania, I think about the many journeys we made from where we lived, outside of Chicago, to Scranton, every single year.

We would go every summer, we went some Christmases, I was brought back, as were my brothers to be christened in the little Court Street Methodist Church, we really have a great deal of love and affection for Pennsylvania. My father plus one of my brothers played football at Penn State, so --

It's always a joy for me to be here. And to come to Johnstown, a place that I've been to before and look forward to coming back and being here.

And having this opportunity to come and visit with you. I want to thank Ron and Jim for welcoming us, [] thank you for explaining some of the work you do and telling us that Nick was a Marine at Camp David when Bill was President, we've actually met him in his prior life, so that was a very special treat. I want to thank my friend Leo Gerard, a man who has fought for justice, for working families in America, North America, and who sets a great example, as does this company, where business and labor work together.

And Ron and Jim told me about something called gain share, where when you get more productive, get more productive, don't have as much scrap, those gains are shared. That's what I believe we ought to be doing in every single business in our country. So on Thursday, I was incredibly humbled and grateful to accept the Democratic Party nomination.

I have to tell you, it was pretty overwhelming to be out there and to think about the awesome responsibility of taking on the challenges facing our country, but I'm an optimist, and I'm confident, because I think if you look at American history, that's how we get things done. It's not the whiners and the complainers and the insulters who move our country forward. It's the workers and the builders, it's people who get up every day and try to figure out how it's going to be better for them and their families.

So then yesterday, Tim and I and Anne and Bill hit the road, going across Pennsylvania sorry we were a little late, the rain was really heavy and we have kind of a long convoy, so I apologize for that, but we are visiting places that prove what Americans can do. We have the most productive, competitive workers in the world, we just need to give our people the chance to succeed. So from Philadelphia to Hatfield to Harrisburg and now here in Johnstown, that's exactly what we're doing. We're talking to people, meeting people who have each others' backs. And you truly are the reason why I have so much confidence that America's best days are still ahead of us, so --

It's in stark contrast to the vision that Donald Trump is laying out, because I don't think we're weak. I don't think we're in decline. I think we can pull together because we are stronger together, and if anybody like him spent a day on the factory floor here, they'd see what teamwork looks like. They'd understand what it means to create and build.

Every day you are showing that America is home to the best products, the hardest workers, the most innovative entrepreneurs in world. And so as we are honest about our challenges here at home and abroad, let's start from understanding that this country and our people have what it takes to get ahead and stay ahead if we have the leadership that gives us that chance. And most of all, we know better than to believe anybody that says, "I alone can fix it.' Right? Those were actually Donald Trump's words at the Republican Convention in Cleveland last week. And I think they should set off alarm bells for everybody. Because by saying that, he's forgetting what all the rest of us do every day. He's forgetting our troops on the front lines; our businesses who see possibilities in every problem; our unions who fight for working families every day.

He's forgetting companies like this one who invest in employees. Americans don't say, "I alone can fix it.' We say, "Oh, okay. How are we going to fix this together? How are we going to raise a family, build a business, heal a community, lift a country?' And that's why we have to stand together. My grandfather, as I said, worked at the Scranton lace mills from the time he was a teenager, until he retired at the age of 65. It was dangerous work in those days, but he was one of the kindest and gentlest men I've ever known. He knew that hard work in America meant that his family would get ahead that it would pay off.

And he was right. My dad, as I said, made it to college, made it to Penn State. Now, if he were still alive, he'd tell you it's because he played football. But that's okay. He got an education. He was proud to get it. He started working as a salesman, enlisting in the Navy after Pearl Harbor. And when the war was over, he started his own small business printing fabric for draperies. And it was a really small business. He would recruit my mother, my brothers and me. He had a print plant. It didn't have any natural light. It was a pretty dark place.

But it had long tables where the fabric would be rolled out, and then the silk screens would be laid on the fabric. And then the paint for the color you wanted to put on the fabric would be poured onto the silkscreen, and then we would take squeegee. One person on one side of the table, another person at the other side sometimes me. We'd take that squeegee. We'd roll it you had to add exactly the right pressure to the other side of the silk screen , lift it up, move the screen, go down the table and keep going.

I remember watching my dad standing for hours over those silk screens. Why did he do it? Because he wanted to give my brothers and me opportunities he never had. And he did. I believe every single family in America deserves that same chance in 2016.

And you know, I know we're living in a time of really hot politics. People say all kinds of things hateful things; insulting things. I'm sorry about that. I think we should have a much better dialogue and debate so that voters can decide which way they want to go. And sometimes, because of all of the static going back and forth, we lose track of where we are. We've come along way since the worst financial crisis in a generation. And it could have gotten a whole lot worse, my friends.

When I think back to 2008, I was in the Senate then, before I accepted President Elect's offer, President Elect Obama's offer, to become Secretary of State. We were losing 800,000 jobs. 9 million Americans lost their jobs. 5 million homes were lost. But it's fair to say we did not know where the bottom was. Unemployment: over 10 percent. Stock market: down to 7,000. This was one of the riskiest economic moments in our country's recent history.

And I will say it: I don't think President Obama and Vice President Biden get the credit they deserve for doing what they had to do to save our economy.

And one thing they saved, and I'll say it over the opposition of the Republican Party, they saved American auto industry, which is a big customer of this plant.

I found that debate back then just unbelievable. People saying, giving speeches: "Let the American auto industry just fall." Millions of jobs were at stake many millions more families of the people who worked in the American auto industry. And I'm proud that it was saved, and I'm even prouder that it had the best year it's had in a long time last year on behalf of selling American-made automobiles. So that's progress.

And I just want people, as we go into this election, to be fair. Because yes, we do have work to do. We can't be satisfied with the status quo I'm not. Not by a long shot. We're still facing deep-seated problems that developed long before that recession and have stayed with us through the recovery. But let's be fair and let's be clear about where we've come from and where we need to go. And let's not buy the same failed economic policies that got us into the mess we were in in the first place.

You know that old saying: "Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me." When people come around and say they're going to cut taxes on the wealthiest Americans, we have seen this before and it does not turn out well. And it's about time we say, "No, we're going to make the wealthiest Americans, for a change, pay their fair share of taxes and support America." That's why I've gone around the country talking to working families across America.

And I've heard all the concerns people have that, you know, the economy isn't working it needs to. Too many people feel like they're out on their own. Well I can tell you that Tim Kaine and I will get up every single day. We will fight for you and we will work for you. We will look out for you. How do you know that? Because I've actually told you what I want to do. I'm not standing here insulting my opponent and making crazy promises. I'm telling you what I want to do. I actually have plans. Some people make fun of me for having plans. Yes, it used to hurt my feelings. It doesn't anymore.

At each of conventions, you get four days to tell the country what you want to do. That's what they're supposed to be for. At the Republican convention, they spent more time on insults for me than on jobs for you. Donald Trump spoke for 75 minutes and offered zero solutions. Now, I don't think that's good enough. I have the [] idea if you're going to ask somebody for their vote, we owe you a clear explanation of what you're going to get for it.

And I have said from the beginning of this campaign, my mission from first day to my last, will be to create more opportunity and more good wages that will give people a chance at their own dreams. We're going to create jobs in Pennsylvania and across America, especially in places that have been left out and left behind. And that means from our inner cities, to our small towns, to Indian country, to coal country, from communities ravaged by addiction like too many in this county.

I believe with all my heart that the economy should work for everyone, not just those at the top. Leo knows because when I was privileged to work with him. To stand up for steelworkers. To start the very first Manufacturing Caucus in the United States Senate. I had no idea then that I was going to run for president. What I cared about is that I had lots of great people in New York who saw their jobs leave.

Who lost them to automation and technology. Who were the victims of efforts to bust unions and undercut fair wages and benefits. So what I wanted to do was to make it clear that in America, we're going to keep making things. Anyone willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family. That's the basic bargain of America.

So, here's how we're going to do it. Within the first 100 days of our administration, we are going to break the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new, good paying jobs since World War II. We will start by making the boldest investment in America infrastructure since we built the Interstate Highway System back in the 1950s.

Now, Donald Trump may think we never win anymore and our country is full of losers, but, boy, is he wrong. We still do big things and we can do more big things. We're not going to build a giant wall, we're going to build roads and bridges and tunnels and forts and airports and water systems and a new electric [].

And we're going to connect up all of America to high-speed internet connectivity. You know, yesterday night in Harrisburg we had a great rally at the Broad Street Market, if any of you know that. We were outdoors. It was a beautiful night. And I said, you know, I'm not just talking traditional infrastructure. I'm talking about broadband, virtual infrastructure. Electricity.

And I made a point that some teachers told me. There's been a recent survey. 70 percent of teachers said that they assign homework that requires the student to go on the internet. Well, you know, that makes sense if you're going to live in an information age you want your kids to be prepared and smart and savvy about how to use the internet.

But here's the kicker 5 million don't have access at home to high-speed internet. And then I was talking to some of the people who were there after the rally and they said boy, were you right. We have places in Pennsylvania where it's still dial up.

I mean, how are we supposed to be competitive in the rest of the world if we have smart, hardworking people their businesses, their kids their essentially shut out of being able to access information quickly and use that information. So, we're talking broadly here. And I'm going to do everything we can to create a national infrastructure bank so that we are going to have investments made every year, not just when Congress decides to appropriate money for that.

The second thing we're going to do is invest in American manufacturing. Anybody who thinks we can't make it in America ought to come to Pennsylvania and do a tour as I have. Now, the products that you're making here in the Commonwealth are being sold all over the world, including products made right here. Ron and Jim were telling me about a big order you had from Bangladesh. You know, we can export. Donald Trump, you hear him, he talks a big game about putting America first.

Well, with all due respect, please explain to me what part of America first leads Trump to make Trump dress shirts in Bangladesh, not Ashland, Pennsylvania. Or to make Trump furniture in Turkey, not Freeburg, Pennsylvania. Or Trump picture frames in India, not Bristol, Pennsylvania. In fact, my husband told me on the bus ride here that I was telling him that I just find it maddening that Trump goes around saying this and all the stuff he makes, he makes in other countries. And Bill says, well you know the shirt that he has one right now, he said that's made in Reading, Pennsylvania.

And, look, you're not going to believe this because it's going to sound too coincidental it's made at a company called Bills.

Well, so Donald Trump says he wants to make America great again. Well, he could start by actually making things in America again. Now, if we're serious about investing in America manufacturing, we have to be serious about defending American workers, and that means we've got to defend the right to organize and bargain collectively, which helped to build the American middle class in the first place.

That's why I love coming to plants like this that work business and labor together. But, that's not Donald Trump. He actually hires union busting firms to break up organizing campaigns. He did that at the hotel in Las Vegas. And then he says he wants to do to America what he's done to his businesses. We can't let that happen. We're going to fight back against attacks on working families, against assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively. Right to work is wrong for workers and it's wrong for America.

And we're going to say no to unfair trade deals. We're going to stand up to China. We're going to support our steelworkers, our autoworkers, our homegrown manufacturers. I feel strongly about this, and I need your help. I need your ideas about how we're going to do this because I'm sick and tired of us having an open market where everybody gets to sell to us, and they often do it at lower costs, undercutting our workers, our businesses, that's not fair and it's not right. Now we've won a few cases, haven't we Leo, in the International Trade Commission?

But we're going to go after that much more aggressively. I will be the first President who has what I'm calling a trade prosecutor to prosecute cases that are undercutting and hurting American manufacturers. Third, we're going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century because there are millions of new jobs and businesses in that. Pennsylvania is doing some good work.

We owe to future generations to work together to combat climate change, not dismiss it as a Chinese hoax the way Donald Trump has. I love this ;he dismisses it as a Chinese hoax when he's standing on a stage running for president and then he goes and asks for help because he's worried about some of his golf courses that are maybe going to be hurt by climate change.

I mean that is just hard to believe but we've got to take it for what it is. There is no other Donald Trump; you've got to look at it from both sides here. So we're going to set bold goals. We're going to install a half a billion solar panels and generate enough clean energy to power every home in America within 10 years.

And we are going to create more good-paying jobs, clean energy jobs like the ones that are being created here in Pennsylvania. Fourth, we're going to support small businesses like the one that my Dad and Tim's Dad ran, put their hearts and souls into them when we were growing up.

And it's important for you to know this. Just as Tim told you, we don't make this up. We actually try to tell you what is factually accurate. We go to a lot of trouble so we can tell you what is actually happening, not just pull it from the air. Just a few hours away in Atlantic City, you're going to find a lot of hard-working contractors, small businesses, workers, painters, plumbers who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills.

We've been meeting some of these people painters, landscapers, plumbers, glass-installers, marble-installers people who did the work and deserve to be paid and didn't get it, not because he couldn't pay them but because he wouldn't pay them. That's just not the way it works in America, Donald.

In America we make good on our promises and when somebody puts in the work you are supposed to pay them. You can't go around bullying small businesses like the one Tim's Dad ran or my father if my father had done all that work to print those drapery fabrics and most of his customers were hotels and businesses, and he used to load them into a van and deliver them and then put them up after all that work, Donald Trump had said, "We're not going to pay you," my father first of all would have been stunned.

And then he would have been furious. But what could he have done? Trump would have said, "Well you don't like it? Sue me. Otherwise take 30 cents on the dollar." That is so wrong, it just gets my blood boiling. I think about my Dad, I'm sure Tim thinks about his small business people who did not deserve to be treated like that and 98 percent of businesses in Pennsylvania are small businesses.

That's one million small businesses, creating jobs, strengthening communities. When you hurt small businesses, you hurt our economy. It's time we gave small businesses a boost. Let's cut the red tape, let's make it easier to get credit. Way too many dreams die in the parking lots of banks these days and we're going to change that too.

In America, if you can dream it, you should be able to build it. And I will tell you how we're going to pay for everything that I've just proposed. That's not complicated, either. Wall Street, corporations, and the super rich are going to start paying their fair share of taxes.

Now let me be absolutely clear here, we don't resent success in America. But when more than 90 percent of the gains in income have gone to the top one percent, that's where the money is. Remember that old movie? Follow the money! Well, that's what we're going to do. American corporations that have gotten so much from our country should be just as patriotic in return.

Many of them are. Johnstown Wire Technologies is, but too many aren't. So under our plan, if companies try to move headquarters to another country to avoid paying their taxes, we will make them pay an exit tax. It's wrong to take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips with the other. So we're going to take back all the money that counties and cities and our governments have given to companies. We'll make them pay it back. And we'll put that money to work right here, creating good jobs.

The basic principle is simple. America thrives when the middle class thrives, and I will not rest until we get wages and incomes rising for all Americans, not just those at the top. Just yesterday, an economist who advised John McCain, the Republican candidate for President in 2008, just put out a new analysis. He analyzed what Trump has said. He analyzed what I've proposed. He said my plans would create millions more jobs than Trump's. In fact, under my plans, the economy would create at least 10 million jobs in our first term.

As for Donald Trump? Well, his policies were found that they would actually cost us nearly three and a half million jobs. So what's the difference between Donald Trump's plan and my plan in terms of jobs created? The combined workforce of Pennsylvania and Ohio. In fact, the more you listen to Donald Trump, the more you realize he is not offering real change. He's offering empty processes, and what little we know about his economic policies, from running up our debt, to starting trade wars, to letting Wall Street run wild, could devastate working families.

So here we are, my friends. Now I know we've got to fight for every single vote. And I'm ready to do that. That's why we're on this bus tour, that's why Tim and I and Bill and Anne and our campaigns are going to cover the country. Because we want you to know the differences. We want you to understand what we're proposing and why we think it will work, and to contrast that with what Trump is saying.

Now when I say things like this, like his plans would cost 3.5 million jobs, although I'm just quoting an economist, he lashes out. He loses his cool at the slightest provocation. Just yesterday, he went after retired general John Allen, who commanded our troops in Afghanistan. General Allen is a distinguished Marine, a hero and a patriot. Donald Trump called him a "failed general." Why? Because he does not believe Donald Trump should be Commander in Chief.

Well I'd say that proves it. Our Commander in Chief shouldn't insult and deride our generals, retired or otherwise. That really should go without saying, but I'm going to respond on behalf of General Allen to those kinds of insults. So, look, I know people are angry and frustrated. I think we just heard one. I understand that. I'm not going into this with some kind of rose-colored glasses. I know we've got work to do, but I'll tell you this, when you're President, and I know it, because I had a front row seat. I watched my husband as he struggled, and after eight years, we had 23 million new jobs, my friends. Incomes went up for everybody.

And then, unfortunately, the Republicans came back. They slashed taxes on the wealthy, I voted against that. I spoke against that. Then they took their eyes off of the financial markets and the mortgage markets and you know what happened. And then we elected another Democratic president, who inherited another mess from the Republicans. It's our choice, America. We can grow together, we can have plans that will enable us to create more jobs, give more people a chance to live up to their own dreams.

Or we can go with demagoguery. We can go with insults. We can go with no plans and insofar as they are even understandable, that would cost us jobs. That's the choice. And boy, is it a historic choice for America. I'm going to do everything I can in this campaign to make the case about what we can do, being stronger together. And I'm not going to respond to what Trump says about me, I don't really care.

I've grown a pretty thick skin. But I'm going to respond when he insults Americans, when he insults workers, when he insults unions, when he insults people who work hard for a living every single day. So let's go out, let's make our case, let's win the election! Thank you and God bless you!"

great to be here. And I know we've got employees from Rodon, K'NEX. We've got students. And raise your hand. I think we have a lot of teachers here. Raise your hand if you're a teacher. All right. Very, very important.

To begin, let me just say with Governor Wolf standing right behind me Philadelphia and Pennsylvania just knocked it out of the park. What a powerful combination. [] I mean, I like to brag in Virginia about Southern hospitality, but apparently there can be hospitality just about everywhere. And you guys did such a good job. And we really appreciate it. My wife, Anne, and I are now on the trail, excited to be part of this team.

And just a couple of thoughts before I introduce our next president, thoughts about manufacturing, thoughts about education, and thoughts about pride. Manufacturing. This brings back memories coming here and seeing some machinery that is really familiar to me and then some machinery that is not so familiar. I grew up in a household where my dad ran a business called Iron Crafters Inc. in the stockyards of Kansas City. And it was an ironworking and welding shop. The first room we walked into, a lot of presses, punches, lathes looked exactly like the ones that I grew up working on, with his five or six employees and my two brothers and me and my mom basically all making that business work. That's what small businesses do.

So you will hear people say when it comes to manufacturing in America manufacturing is dead, but that is not the case. And it's often these family businesses, just like Rodon K'NEX, that are keeping it alive that then are revitalizing it and bringing a renaissance so that we can do it in the 21st Century. And so we honor that in you, and that's why we wanted to come by on sort of our first road stop on a two-day bus tour in Pennsylvania and Ohio to talk about jobs. We've got to bring manufacturing back. And the way we do it is using the examples of successful companies, like Rodon K'NEX.

Second, education. We've got educators here. And we know how important that is.

I'll tell you something that I really liked last night. There were many moments in Secretary Clinton's speech that I really liked. One of the ones was when she was talking about the need for a great workforce. She, as you know, has laid out a pretty important plan for families to enable us to educate our children and to try to guarantee them that they would go through college debt-free. Now, that would be a really, really big thing we could do for our kids.

But you may have noticed that she also kind of said and really underlined it in what she said that we shouldn't just perpetuate sort of the myth that it's only about college education. It's got to be about apprenticeships. It's got to be about technical skills and trades and careers. Often jobs in these areas are the most likely jobs not to ever be outsourced. And so we have to have an education system that inculcates in the students an appreciation for manufacturing and trades.

And that's another reason, Mike, to you and the whole team here, Rodon K'NEX gets it. The products that you produce capture and spark that imagination in students, but you also work with educators to advance that cause. Hillary Clinton is a big believer that we've got to define educational success in a very broad way so that we can train and inspire the next generation of neighbors, just like Rodon K'NEXdoes.

Now, the third thing is pride. This company has a pride story. This company had 50 percent, maybe more than 50 percent, of its product being produced outside of the United States, manufactured outside of the United States, before 2009. And when a lot of companies; in fact, including companies that are owned by the Republican nominee, Donald Trump, are pushing more and more jobs overseas and when there are policies, even tax policies, in the country that give you a benefit if you push jobs overseas, Rodon K'NEX was fighting against that trend, fighting to make it in America by proud American workers with high-quality products that nobody in the rest of the world can match. This is a pride story. And that is one of the reasons we're here, too. You should be proud of yourselves just like Hillary.

Hillary Clinton understands that pride. She feels that pride. She knows that the years, especially since 2008, with the greatest meltdown of the economy since the 1930s, have imposed an awful lot of pain on an awful lot of people and an awful lot of industries and an awful lot of communities. The American economy has climbed back up the ladder to climb out of it, but we have a long way to go. And she has laid out very clearly a set of strategies from the education strategies I talked about earlier to important strategies to make sure that those who are working are treated fairly in their benefits and their wages and also to investments to grow the economy, whether those be investments in innovation and research or investments in infrastructure to build the society that we want.

Hillary Clinton is proud to be here, and so am I. Hillary Clinton is proud of the American worker and just wants to make sure that we have policies that reward work as much as we say we're proud of the workers. And that's one of the reasons why I am just so honored to be part of this ticket.

So will you please do this with me: give a great Pennsylvania welcome to a history-making person who is going to lead us [] the 45th president of the United States, Hillary Rodham Clinton."

HILLARY CLINTON:

"Thank you so much. Wow. I am I am very honored and excited about being here with all of you. I am grateful to be here with your United States Senator, Bob Casey, someone whom I've known a long time and had the privilege of working with in the Senate, as Tim Kaine has had. I also am delighted to be here with Governor Tom Wolf, somebody who knows about family-owned businesses and how important it is that we keep them alive and thriving.

And I also want to thank Michael, Michael Araten, for describing about what this company does, why it's important, and the goals and the values that undergird it. So, in addition to Michael, I also want to recognize Joel Glickman and Bob Glickman, Garrett Talley, all of the families and employees associated with this company.

Now, we could have come a lot of different places because we started off in Philadelphia after the end of the convention last night, but we wanted to drive through Pennsylvania, a state I've spent a lot of time in because my father was born in Scranton and we used to grow to Scranton every single summer and a lot of Christmases from our home outside of Chicago. So I've been all over Pennsylvania. And my dad played football at Penn State. My brother played football at Penn State. And it's a place that's very meaningful to me.

And I was particularly pleased that Tim could be joined by his wonderful wife, Anne, who is the commissioner of education in the Commonwealth of Virginia. And I was so pleased that I could be joined by my husband, who knows a little bit about getting the economy to work well for everybody. And if you're looking for a kind of pessimistic, downbeat vision of America, we're not your folks. We do not buy into that dark, divisive image that was presented at the Republican convention last week. Donald Trump says America is weak, that we're in decline. Well, all I can tell you is, we are the best-placed country in the world to seize the future. But that doesn't happen by wishing for it. It happens by building for it, something that you here at K'NEX know a lot about.

That's why we're on a jobs tour. We want to tell you what we will do if we're so fortunate enough to be the president and vice president. We know that companies like this one provide some very important lessons. You have to have a well-trained workforce. The STEM and STED skills are important for the combination of design and production. We know that if we're smart about it, we can bring jobs back from China and other places if we make up our minds to do that, just like that's happened here. We know that companies that invest in their employees ;as we were walking through the back, I introduced myself to a few of the employees. One had been here 24 years. One had been here 23 years because Rodon and K'NEX actually see employees as assets to be invested in and treated with respect.

So that's why I've laid out throughout this campaign very specific plans about how we're going to get the economy growing again, creating more good jobs, and helping people acquire the skills to fill the more than one million jobs that are available in America today, that are open, that are not being filled. There's nothing we can't do if we make up our minds that we're going to address these challenges.

So let me just briefly say we're going to make big investments in infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean energy technology. We're going to do more to help small businesses start, grow, and succeed. We're going to make it possible for more people to acquire the skills that you need to be competitive in the economy of today and tomorrow. We're also going to make it a government policy to invest money in manufacturing communities, like Hatfield, so that more companies can make it in America. It's absolutely wrong that American companies take tax breaks and then export jobs. They get the tax breaks in order to have jobs in America, and I believe if they take tax breaks and then they try to export jobs, they should have to pay back every single penny of every tax [] made for our country.

And we will then put that to work in communities like Hatfield with companies like this. We're also going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. Now, this is something that I think is such an opportunity for America. As I said last night, I believe in climate change. It's real. It's happening. I'm not denying it. Why would I deny it? It's real. [] And we can either wring our hands, or we can deny it, or we can accept it and we can treat it as both a challenge and opportunity.

So that's why I want us to produce and deploy half a billion more solar panels in the next four years, and enough clean energy to power every home in America. And I know that there's clean energy jobs here in Montgomery County. Right, Marcel? Because I have visited some of those clean energy jobs. Some states are moving ahead and creating more clean energy through wind and solar and geothermal and other approaches. Some states are denying it.

There's a Republican governor in Florida who sent out an edict to his state employees as governor, if you can believe it, telling them that they would be disciplined and maybe lose their jobs if they wrote about or talked about climate change. (Booing.) And then down in South Florida, you have noonday floods happening. You have salt water getting into wells. Of all the states in America that are the most at danger from climate change, Florida is number one. And you've got a governor who is denying it at the cost of increasing insurance premiums and other kinds of risks. This is crazy.

And when somebody like Donald Trump says, well, he thinks it's a hoax, and that he's not a scientist, well, go talk to a scientist. There are a lot of them right here in Montgomery County. We're going to make sure that people start making and building things in America because we know that small businesses are at the core of creating most of the good jobs in America. As you heard Tim Kaine say, Donald Trump goes around with that hat on, Make America Great Again. Everything he makes he makes somewhere else besides America. The only thing he makes in America are bankruptcies, both his own and of the people who []

And it really is shocking. I didn't know any of this before he became the leading Republican candidate. But then I started running into people who told me stories. Then I went to Atlantic City, and I met small businesses that had been ruined because they took work offered by one of Trump's hotels and casinos. I met the man who installed the glass in one of his casinos, a small company. Submitted the bill. The work was done. The Trump organization said, no, we're not going to pay. What do you mean, you're not going to pay? I did the work. I employed people. I put my money up front to buy the supplies. We're not going to pay you. It's shocking.

Then after a while they'll come back and they basically say to the small businesses, go ahead and sue us. He keeps a battery of lawyers on hand in order to make it impossible for people to sue and be successful even when they're in the right. I met the man whose small business third generation, as I recall supplied all the marble for one of the casinos. Same thing happened. We're not going to pay you. It's shocking. Then they come back and say, well, maybe we'll pay you 50 cents on the dollar. Maybe 30 cents on the dollar. The marble company and its owners had to take bankruptcy, and they didn't walk away with somebody else's money the way that Trump did. They were destroyed as a company.

We have a film about an architect who designed the clubhouse at one of Trump's golf courses. It was a big job for this small architectural firm. He was really proud of it. Finished it. Ribbon cutting. It was opened. Events being held. The architect submits his bill. Doesn't hear anything. A couple months go by. He calls. They say, we're not going to pay it. The architect was so shocked, he said, well, I have to talk to Mr. Trump. I can't believe he knows what you're doing. Fine. The architect was in New York City. Goes into one of those big buildings with Trump's name on it. Gets ushered into an office. Trump's there with his lawyers. We're not going to pay for it. But it's built. I did the work. If you want to take 30 cents on the dollar, that's all you're going to get.

I tell you those stories because if someone runs for president and says their primary qualification for being president is because they claim to be a successful businessman, then it's only fair to ask, how did you become successful? We don't resent success in America. But we do resent people who take advantage of others in order to line their own pockets on the way up.

If I weren't the Democratic nominee, I would still be going around the country saying, hey, take a hard look. When someone says, I can fix it alone, what does that really mean? Because I don't know anybody who can. Instead, we are stronger together. We're going to work together. We're going to set goals together. We're going to achieve those goals. And the centerpiece of my presidency will be more good-paying jobs with rising incomes for more Americans, because if you're willing to work hard, you ought to be able to get ahead and stay ahead, in my experience.

I'm just so happy to be here in a company with such a great history, such great values, such a great success, bring jobs back from China, and then exporting around the world. That's what we have to do. Nobody can outcompete America when we put our mind to it. We're going to roll up our sleeves and we're going to get to work, and America's best years are still ahead of us. Thank you all."

"Hey, Philadelphia! [] Wow. Man, wow. I was tired after last night, but I'm awake now. Listen, what a warm welcome. Hello to Philadelphia. I'll tell you, we come from Virginia and we think we have this hospitality thing down pat, but Philadelphia really showed off this week.

So, some thank-yous. I want to thank my great friend and Senate colleague Bob Casey. What a wonderful what a wonderful public servant. And we are so excited to have another great Pennsylvanian about to join us in the United States Senate, Katie McGinty. Katie! You have heard earlier today already from two of the people who were absolutely key to making this convention work like a charm, and that's our Congressman Bob Brady and Mayor Jim Kenney. Thank you, guys, for all your great work. Governor Ed Rendell he and I share being mayors, governors and DNC chairs. We surely have time we get to go right by purgatory and right to the golden gates because of what we've done. Ed Rendell great, great public servant. We have in the pre-program you've already heard from Councilwoman Cherelle Parker and Reverend Bonnie Camarada and Bobby Hill and Josh Shapiro, so many great public servants broadly defined in this room.

It has been an incredible week, and I could not be prouder to be here in Philadelphia and accept the request of a spectacular public servant, Hillary Clinton, to accept my party's nomination to be vice president. Hillary! Hillary! Hillary!

I shared the other night at the convention how kind of weird I feel being here. I mean, I just grew up in such a non-political household. My dad ran this union-organized ironworker shop, and mom and dad are here somewhere in this room. They're 81 years old and we're having a great time together. And I don't know if there's any Irish Americans here, but they're standing with a buddy they're standing with a buddy from County Cork, Pádraig Fleming, who flew over to surprise me.

So, look, we're here, a strong family, all of us. We worked in my dad's business, my mom and my brothers and me, and pitched in. That's what family businesses do. I know a lot of you come from that. When family says, "You've got to help,' you've got to help and we like helping. I learned a lot from working for my dad. I learned a lot from a Jesuit high school I went to that taught wow. Jesuits aren't that big an applause line in every city, but I'm glad I'm glad to know in Philadelphia I'm glad to know in Philadelphia I bet there were a lot of Pope Francis Catholics here before there was a Pope Francis. But those values of hard work and of faith were my guiding principles, and that's one of the reasons that I developed such an admiration and friendship for Hillary Clinton, because those are the same values that have driven her ;her growing up in a small business household, her growing up inspired by a Methodist youth pastor. Those are her values, and she's been living them fighting for kids and families, putting them first for her entire career your entire career.

In my own life, I took the lessons from my parents and I took the lessons from the Jesuits that I worked with as a missionary in Honduras and I basically decided to do what virtually all of you guys are doing, which is to measure what I do by how it helps somebody else. Can you serve others? Can you do good for others? It's not about title. It's not about money. It's not about prestige. It's not about popularity. It's not about anything other than serving other people, and that's the kind of candidate we have.

So we're starting today this bus tour. Now, this is the part of the campaign I really like. I mean, the big events are fun, but I don't like wearing a tie that much, so I'd rather I'd rather just go out and pound the pavement. And so we're starting a three-day bus tour today, and this is the first rally. And then we're going to go and it's no accident this is the first rally. And then we're going to go across Pennsylvania and we're going to go across Iowa, and Secretary Clinton is going to be laying out why she is going to be such a fantastic president ;a fantastic president.

We're going to be drawing that contrast between Hillary Clinton's plans for our country and Donald Trump's empty promises and no plans for the country. You know you know her plans. I mean, I don't know. Is there anybody at Temple that likes the idea of debt-free college? I mean. Yeah.

She has pledged in the first 100 days of the administration to make a massive investment in new jobs, education, work training, rebuilding our nation's infrastructure, fighting the battles that she has fought time and time again. And it's not just about what she says. It's that she's delivered.

I know you watched last night as she talked about and as Chelsea talked about her battling to get health insurance for 8 million American kids when she was First Lady. Now, don't you want don't you want a president who knows how to battle and get things done for regular people, who might not be able to get those things done without a great champion? Of course, you do. Of course, you do.

So that's what we'll do over the next couple of days. We'll talk about creating jobs. We'll talk about raising wages. We'll talk about the leadership that America needs to play in the world, a leadership that's got to be based on alliances and building bridges and just using the relationships we have to defeat forces of terrorism and forces of prejudice, forces of anti-Semitism. We can do that when we work together around the world.

And, finally, and, finally and in some ways, this is the thing that matters the most to me as a former civil rights lawyer, that we want to make sure that we've got a community of respect-- right? or, as the civil rights leaders used to say, a beloved community, where people are not demeaned because of who they are, not dissed because they are somebody with a disability or they're LGBT or they come from another country or their skin color is different or they speak a different language but embraced.

Hey, don't you guys in Pennsylvania call yourself a commonwealth, just like we in Virginia do, just like we in Virginia do? That's different than saying you're a state. Anybody who says we're a commonwealth, what you are saying is the wealth we hold we hold in common. It's got to be about everybody. It's got to be about bringing everybody together. And those are Hillary Clinton's values.

Now, the last thing I'll say before we bring up our champion and the main event is I've noticed there's a few differences between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. Now, let's see. What's today, Friday? I think I can well, I'm going to try to boil it down. You've seen Trump basically pitch in a very dark and negative convention in Cleveland a very different view of this country. Weren't you proud of how optimistic, upbeat, positive, pro-America the convention was here in the message of our candidate? Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. The Republican convention was like a twisted and negative tour. It wasn't a tour of this country. It was a journey through Donald Trump's mind, and that is a very frightening place. That is a very frightening place.

When it comes to the economy we're at a college. We're at a college. Can I ask you a question? In Hillary, we've got a "You're hired' president. Would you rather have that or a "You're fired' president? Absolutely. That's not that hard. That's not that hard. In Hillary, you've got a bridge builder. Would you rather have that or have a trash talker? A bridge builder, right? A bridge builder. And in Hillary, you've got that character from before she was ever in office that puts kids and families first.

This is really important. This is really important. If you want to know about trustworthiness and character of somebody in public life, look to see --

AUDIENCE MEMBER: "We trust Hillary."

TIM KAINE: "All right. You got to the punchline. He got to the punchline. He got to the punchline. I like you. I like you. All right. All right.

Now, look. If you want to know how you can view somebody in public life, look to see if they had a passion before they got in office and whether they have continued that passion consistently throughout their entire time. And you know that Hillary Clinton, in good times and tough times, in victory and defeat, through hell or high water, in office or out of office, since she was a teenager has been putting kids and families first. And you also know that Donald Trump has had a passion, too. And that passion is Donald Trump, Donald Trump. So it's kids first or me first.

But, look, I am so glad to be on this ticket. It's a history-making ticket. Anything I can do to help us succeed and anything I can do that will help this administration be a fantastic one from first day to last is going to be my humble honor to do. So please give a great Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, American welcome to our next president, Hillary Clinton."

HILLARY CLINTON:

Thank you! Thank you all so much. Thank you. Thank you very, very much. I have to begin by thanking our hosts, the people of Philadelphia. You know a little something about history and about making history. And I am so grateful to everyone in this city who pulled such a great convention together, who were so gracious, welcoming and hospitable, and I am thrilled that so many Americans from everywhere got a chance to see Philadelphia! To see what's in this great city.

People kept coming back from going for walks, going to museums, going to other sites, telling me how much they were impressed. And so I want to thank your mayor. Thank you, Mayor Kenney. I want to thank your Congressman who tries to come home to Philadelphia everyday and I know why, because he loves this city: Bob Brady!

I am always happy to be here with someone who's been a friend for Bill and me over so many years, an extraordinary public servant and advocate, former governor and mayor, Ed Rendell.

Now I, like Tim, I had the great pleasure of serving in the senate with senator Bob Casey, and I appreciated his tenacity, the attention to detail, the work he did for you every single day. And so I want to thank Bob, and I want also to recognize who I hope will be his partner in the Senate come November, Katie McGinty.

And I hope the next Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Josh Shapiro.

This has been such an invigorating, exciting week. As I said last night, we heard from the man from Hope, Bill Clinton. And we heard from the man of hope, Barack Obama.

And I was so excited to introduce to America our partners. It's going to be fun to travel with both Tim and Anne because they are going to demonstrate to the country what the people of Virginia already know. There are no better people to have in your corner than Tim Kaine and Anne Holton.

Now I don't know about you, but I stayed up really late last night. It was just hard to go to sleep. Oh, thank you, thank you. It was so exciting, but I have to tell you, it was also kind of overwhelming. I take deeply and with great humility the responsibility that this campaign imposes on us.

There is no doubt in my mind that every election in our democracy is important in its own way, but I can't think of an election that is more important, certainly in my lifetime. And it's not so much that I'm on the ticket, it is because of the stark choice that is posed to America in this election.

So when I did, when I did wake up this morning, thank you when I did start moving, and Bill and I started drinking our coffee, or asking that it be administered through an IV, we suddenly looked at each other and we realized, as of tomorrow, we have 100 days to make our case to America.

So what better place to kick off this campaign than right here in Philadelphia where it all started 240 years ago. I believe with all my heart that our Founders came together to create one nation because they understood what we understand: we are stronger together!

And as we pointed out during our four great days of our convention, you heard something very different from the Republicans, didn't you? We might as well be talking about two different countries, or, as someone said to me, two different planets.

Donald Trump painted a picture, a negative, dark, divisive picture of a country in decline. He insisted that America is weak, and he told us all, after laying out this very dark picture, that "I alone can fix it.'

Now, as I watched and heard that, it set off alarm bells because just think about what happened here 240 years ago. Think about our Founders, coming together, a Declaration of Independence, writing a Constitution. They set up our form of government, the longest lasting democracy in the history of the world. And you know they did it because they knew they didn't want one person, one man to have all the power like a king. And think about George Washington, our first president. After he served, he stepped down voluntarily. People around him couldn't believe it, but he said no, this is an example we should set.

A democracy requires something from all of us, not just people we elect, but every single one of us. And Washington set that example. And I don't know any Founder, no matter how strong they were, how smart they were who believed that only they could solve our problems, so ;and I'll tell you something else they also expected a kind of raucous debate in America. But at the end of the debate, we have to come together and get things done, don't we?

So as Tim said, we are going to get on a bus as soon as we leave here and we're going to drive through Pennsylvania into Ohio. It's kind for nostalgic for me, my dad was born in Scranton, I spent every summer of my life up in northeast Pennsylvania. My father, my brother went to Penn State, so I know, I know how beautiful this commonwealth is and how wonderful the people are.

But we've got work to do. I'm not satisfied with the status quo. I'm not telling you that everything is just peachy keen. I'm telling you, we've made progress but we have work to do if we're going to make sure that everybody is included.

And you know, I think that we've got to have more good jobs, we've got to raise wages, we've got to tackle inequality. We've got to make this economy work for everyone, not just those at the top.

And if you listen really closely to the Republican Convention, you know that Donald Trump talked for 75 minutes and did not offer one solution. In fact, his speech, his whole convention seemed more about insulting me instead of helping the American people.

So here's what I've said I will do. And we're going to get to work on the very first day, within the first 100 days of our administration we're going to break through the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. We're going to do it in infrastructure, technology, clean energy, advanced manufacturing.

And I'm also going to pay special attention to those parts of our country that have been left out and left behind. From our inner cities to our small towns, from Indian Country to Coal Country. From communities ravaged by addiction and places hollowed out by plant closures.

Anybody willing to work in America should be able to find a job to get ahead and stay ahead. That's my goal.

So on our bus tour we're going to be visiting a few places where people are making things. I find it highly amusing that Donald Trump talks about "Make America Great Again.' He doesn't make a thing in America except bankruptcies.

So there's a lot to be done my friends, and I'm excited. I'm excited to have Tim and Anne as part of this team, and I'm excited to have the 42nd President of the United States as part of this team. The four of us are going to barnstorm the country because, as a very smart president who just so happens to be here today once said, "There is nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what's right with America.'

So now, we had a great convention, but we've got to go out and we've got to fight for our vision of the future. And I can't do it alone. I need each and every one of you, here's what I ask you to do. Please, join us. Go to hillaryclinton.com or text JOIN, J-O-I-N to 47246 to be part of this campaign. And we are hiring organizers here in Pennsylvania and across the country.

And between now and election day, we are going to register 3 million more people. And we're not just going to register them, we're going to get them to commit to vote.

We feel deeply the responsibility for continuing the work that started down the road from here 240 years ago. Now, nobody who looks like me was thought to be possible to run for president back then. No one who looked like Barack Obama was thought to be possible.

But contrary to Donald Trump, I believe every time we knock down a barrier in America, it liberates everyone in America.

I have to say, last night, after the end of our convention, I knew that every parent in this country could look at their son or their daughter and now say the very same thing: you too could be President of the United States.

Thank you all, God bless you!

Thank you! Thank you for that amazing welcome.

Thank you all for the great convention that we've had.

And Chelsea, thank you. I'm so proud to be your mother and so proud of the woman you've become. Thanks for bringing Marc into our family, and Charlotte and Aidan into the world.

And Bill, that conversation we started in the law library 45 years ago is still going strong. It's lasted through good times that filled us with joy, and hard times that tested us.

And I've even gotten a few words in along the way.

On Tuesday night, I was so happy to see that my Explainer-in-Chief is still on the job. I'm also grateful to the rest of my family and the friends of a lifetime. To all of you whose hard work brought us here tonight. And to those of you who joined our campaign this week. And what a remarkable week it's been.

We heard the man from Hope, Bill Clinton. And the man of Hope, Barack Obama. America is stronger because of President Obama's leadership, and I'm better because of his friendship.

We heard from our terrific vice president, the one-and-only Joe Biden. He spoke from his big heart about our party's commitment to working people, as only he can do.

First Lady Michelle Obama reminded us that our children are watching, and the president we elect is going to be their president, too.

And for those of you out there who are just getting to know Tim Kaine -- you're soon going to understand why the people of Virginia keep promoting him: from city council and mayor, to Governor, and now Senator. He'll make the whole country proud as our Vice President.

And I want to thank Bernie Sanders. Bernie, your campaign inspired millions of Americans, particularly the young people who threw their hearts and souls into our primary. You've put economic and social justice issues front and center, where they belong.

And to all of your supporters here and around the country: I want you to know, I've heard you. Your cause is our cause. Our country needs your ideas, energy, and passion. That's the only way we can turn our progressive platform into real change for America. We wrote it together -- now let's go out there and make it happen together.

My friends, we've come to Philadelphia -- the birthplace of our nation -- because what happened in this city 240 years ago still has something to teach us today.

We all know the story. But we usually focus on how it turned out - and not enough on how close that story came to never being written at all.

When representatives from 13 unruly colonies met just down the road from here, some wanted to stick with the King. Some wanted to stick it to the king, and go their own way. The revolution hung in the balance. Then somehow they began listening to each other  compromising  finding common purpose.

And by the time they left Philadelphia, they had begun to see themselves as one nation.

That's what made it possible to stand up to a King. That took courage. They had courage. Our Founders embraced the enduring truth that we are stronger together.

America is once again at a moment of reckoning. Powerful forces are threatening to pull us apart. Bonds of trust and respect are fraying.

And just as with our founders, there are no guarantees. It truly is up to us. We have to decide whether we all will work together so we all can rise together.

Our country's motto is e pluribus unum: out of many, we are one. Will we stay true to that motto?

Well, we heard Donald Trump's answer last week at his convention. He wants to divide us - from the rest of the world, and from each other.

He's betting that the perils of today's world will blind us to its unlimited promise. He's taken the Republican Party a long way... from "Morning in America" to "Midnight in America." He wants us to fear the future and fear each other.

Well, a great Democratic President, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, came up with the perfect rebuke to Trump more than eighty years ago, during a much more perilous time. "The only thing we have to fear is fear itself."

Now we are clear-eyed about what our country is up against. But we are not afraid. We will rise to the challenge, just as we always have. We will not build a wall. Instead, we will build an economy where everyone who wants a good paying job can get one.

And we'll build a path to citizenship for millions of immigrants who are already contributing to our economy!

We will not ban a religion. We will work with all Americans and our allies to fight and defeat terrorism.

Yet we know there is a lot to do.

Too many people haven't had a pay raise since the crash.

There's too much inequality. Too little social mobility. Too much paralysis in Washington. Too many threats at home and abroad.

But just look at the strengths we bring as Americans to meet these challenges. We have the most dynamic and diverse people in the world. We have the most tolerant and generous young people we've ever had. We have the most powerful military. The most innovative entrepreneurs. The most enduring values.

Freedom and equality, justice and opportunity. We should be so proud that these words are associated with us. I have to tell you, as your Secretary of State, I went to 112 countries, and when people hear those words -- they hear America.

So don't let anyone tell you that our country is weak. We're not. Don't let anyone tell you we don't have what it takes. We do.

And most of all, don't believe anyone who says: "I alone can fix it."

Those were actually Donald Trump's words in Cleveland. And they should set off alarm bells for all of us.

Really? I alone can fix it? Isn't he forgetting? Troops on the front lines.

Police officers and fire fighters who run toward danger. Doctors and nurses who care for us. Teachers who change lives.

Entrepreneurs who see possibilities in every problem. Mothers who lost children to violence and are building a movement to keep other kids safe.

He's forgetting every last one of us. Americans don't say: "I alone can fix it." We say: "We'll fix it together."

Remember: Our Founders fought a revolution and wrote a Constitution so America would never be a nation where one person had all the power. Two hundred and forty years later, we still put our faith in each other.

Look at what happened in Dallas after the assassinations of five brave police officers. Chief David Brown asked the community to support his force, maybe even join them.

And you know how the community responded? Nearly 500 people applied in just 12 days. That's how Americans answer when the call for help goes out.

20 years ago I wrote a book called "It Takes a Village." A lot of people looked at the title and asked, what the heck do you mean by that?

This is what I mean. None of us can raise a family, build a business, heal a community or lift a country totally alone.

America needs every one of us to lend our energy, our talents, our ambition to making our nation better and stronger. I believe that with all my heart.

That's why "Stronger Together" is not just a lesson from our history. It's not just a slogan for our campaign.

It's a guiding principle for the country we've always been and the future we're going to build.

A country where the economy works for everyone, not just those at the top. Where you can get a good job and send your kids to a good school, no matter what zip code you live in.

A country where all our children can dream, and those dreams are within reach. Where families are strong communities are safe And yes, love trumps hate.

That's the country we're fighting for. That's the future we're working toward And so it is with humility. . . determination . . . and boundless confidence in America's promise that I accept your nomination for President of the United States!

Now, sometimes the people at this podium are new to the national stage.

As you know, I'm not one of those people. I've been your First Lady. Served 8 years as a Senator from the great State of New York.

Then I represented all of you as Secretary of State.

But my job titles only tell you what I've done. They don't tell you why.

The truth is, through all these years of public service, the "service" part has always come easier to me than the "public" part.

I get it that some people just don't know what to make of me. So let me tell you.

The family I'm from . . . well, no one had their name on big buildings. My family were builders of a different kind. Builders in the way most American families are.

They used whatever tools they had -- whatever God gave them -- and whatever life in America provided -- and built better lives and better futures for their kids.

My grandfather worked in the same Scranton lace mill for 50 years. Because he believed that if he gave everything he had, his children would have a better life than he did. And he was right.

My dad, Hugh, made it to college. He played football at Penn State and enlisted in the Navy after Pearl Harbor.

When the war was over he started his own small business, printing fabric for draperies. I remember watching him stand for hours over silk screens.

He wanted to give my brothers and me opportunities he never had. And he did.

My mother, Dorothy, was abandoned by her parents as a young girl. She ended up on her own at 14, working as a house maid. She was saved by the kindness of others.

Her first grade teacher saw she had nothing to eat at lunch, and brought extra food to share. The lesson she passed on to me years later stuck with me: No one gets through life alone. We have to look out for each other and lift each other up.

She made sure I learned the words of our Methodist faith: "Do all the good you can, for all the people you can, in all the ways you can, as long as ever you can."

I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund, going door-to-door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school.

I remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted to go to school -- it just didn't seem possible. And I couldn't stop thinking of my mother and what she went through as a child.

It became clear to me that simply caring is not enough. To drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. You need both understanding and action.

So we gathered facts. We built a coalition. And our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities.

It's a big idea, isn't it? Every kid with a disability has the right to go to school.

But how do you make an idea like that real? You do it step-by-step, year-by-year sometimes even door-by-door.

And my heart just swelled when I saw Anastasia Somoza on this stage, representing millions of young people who -- because of those changes to our laws -- are able to get an education.

It's true... I sweat the details of policy -- whether we're talking about the exact level of lead in the drinking water in Flint, Michigan, the number of mental health facilities in Iowa, or the cost of your prescription drugs.

Because it's not just a detail if it's your kid - if it's your family. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president.

Over the last three days, you've seen some of the people who've inspired me. People who let me into their lives, and became a part of mine.

People like Ryan Moore and Lauren Manning. They told their stories Tuesday night.

I first met Ryan as a 7-year-old. He was wearing a full body brace that must have weighed forty pounds because I leaned over to lift him up.

Children like Ryan kept me going when our plan for universal health care failedand kept me working with leaders of both parties to help create the Children's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million kids every year.

Lauren Manning, who stood here with such grace and power, was gravely injured on 9/11. It was the thought of her, and Debbie St. John, and John Dolan and Joe Sweeney, and all the victims and survivors, that kept me working as hard as I could in the Senate on behalf of 9/11 families, and our first responders who got sick from their time at Ground Zero.

I was still thinking of Lauren, Debbie and all the others ten years later in the White House Situation Room when President Obama made the courageous decision that finally brought Osama bin Laden to justice.

In this campaign, I've met so many people who motivate me to keep fighting for change. And, with your help, I will carry all of your voices and stories with me to the White House.

And you heard, you heard from Republicans and Independents who are supporting our campaign. I will be a President for Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. For the struggling, the striving and the successful. For those who vote for me and those who don't. For all Americans. Together.

Tonight, we've reached a milestone in our nation's march toward a more perfect union: the first time that a major party has nominated a woman for President.

Standing here as my mother's daughter, and my daughter's mother, I'm so happy this day has come. Happy for grandmothers and little girls and everyone in between.

Happy for boys and men, too -- because when any barrier falls in America, for anyone, it clears the way for everyone. When there are no ceilings, the sky's the limit. So let's keep going, until every one of the 161 million women and girls across America has the opportunity she deserves.

Because even more important than the history we make tonight, is the history we will write together in the years ahead. Let's begin with what we're going to do to help working people in our country get ahead and stay ahead.

Now, I don't think President Obama and Vice President Biden get the credit they deserve for saving us from the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes.

Our economy is so much stronger than when they took office. Nearly 15 million new private-sector jobs. Twenty million more Americans with health insurance. And an auto industry that just had its best year ever. That's real progress.

But none of us can be satisfied with the status quo. Not by a long shot.

We're still facing deep-seated problems that developed long before the recession and have stayed with us through the recovery.

I've gone around our country talking to working families. And I've heard from so many of you who feel like the economy just isn't working.

Some of you are frustrated -- even furious. And you know what??? You're right. It's not yet working the way it should.

Americans are willing to work -- and work hard. But right now, an awful lot of people feel there is less and less respect for the work they do. And less respect for them, period.

Democrats are the party of working people. But we haven't done a good enough job showing that we get what you're going through, and that we're going to do something about it.

So I want to tell you tonight how we will empower Americans to live better lives.

My primary mission as President will be to create more opportunity and more good jobs with rising wages right here in the United States... From my first day in office to my last! Especially in places that for too long have been left out and left behind.

From our inner cities to our small towns, from Indian Country to Coal Country. From communities ravaged by addiction to regions hollowed out by plant closures.

And here's what I believe. I believe America thrives when the middle class thrives. I believe that our economy isn't working the way it should because our democracy isn't working the way it should.

That's why we need to appoint Supreme Court justices who will get money out of politics and expand voting rights, not restrict them. And if necessary we'll pass a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United!

I believe American corporations that have gotten so much from our country should be just as patriotic in return. Many of them are. But too many aren't. It's wrong to take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips with the other.

And I believe Wall Street can never, ever be allowed to wreck Main Street again. I believe in science. I believe that climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying clean energy jobs.

I believe that when we have millions of hardworking immigrants contributing to our economy, it would be self-defeating and inhumane to try to kick them out. Comprehensive immigration reform will grow our economy and keep families together - and it's the right thing to do.

Whatever party you belong to, or if you belong to no party at all, if you share these beliefs, this is your campaign.

If you believe that companies should share profits, not pad executive bonuses, join us. If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage and no one working full time should have to raise their children in poverty join us.

If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable health carejoin us. If you believe that we should say "no" to unfair trade deals... that we should stand up to China... that we should support our steelworkers and autoworkers and homegrown manufacturersjoin us.

If you believe we should expand Social Security and protect a woman's right to make her own health care decisions join us.

And yes, if you believe that your working mother, wife, sister, or daughter deserves equal pay join us... Let's make sure this economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.

Now, you didn't hear any of this from Donald Trump at his convention. He spoke for 70-odd minutes -- and I do mean odd. And he offered zero solutions.

But we already know he doesn't believe these things. No wonder he doesn't like talking about his plans. You might have noticed, I love talking about mine.

In my first 100 days, we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. Jobs in manufacturing, clean energy, technology and innovation, small business, and infrastructure.

If we invest in infrastructure now, we'll not only create jobs today, but lay the foundation for the jobs of the future. And we will transform the way we prepare our young people for those jobs.

Bernie Sanders and I will work together to make college tuition-free for the middle class and debt-free for all! We will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt.

It's just not right that Donald Trump can ignore his debts, but students and families can't refinance theirs.

And here's something we don't say often enough: College is crucial, but a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job.

We're going to help more people learn a skill or practice a trade and make a good living doing it. We're going to give small businesses a boost. Make it easier to get credit. Way too many dreams die in the parking lots of banks.

In America, if you can dream it, you should be able to build it. We're going to help you balance family and work. And you know what, if fighting for affordable child care and paid family leave is playing the "woman card," then Deal Me In!

Now, here's the thing, we're not only going to make all these investments, we're going to pay for every single one of them. And here's how: Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich are going to start paying their fair share of taxes.

Not because we resent success. Because when more than 90% of the gains have gone to the top 1%, that's where the money is. And we are going to follow the money. And if companies take tax breaks and then ship jobs overseas, we'll make them pay us back. And we'll put that money to work where it belongs  creating jobs here at home!

Now I know some of you are sitting at home thinking, well that all sounds pretty good. But how are you going to get it done? How are you going to break through the gridlock in Washington?

Look at my record. I've worked across the aisle to pass laws and treaties and to launch new programs that help millions of people. And if you give me the chance, that's what I'll do as President.

But Trump, he's a businessman. He must know something about the economy.

Well, let's take a closer look. In Atlantic City, 60 miles from here, you'll find contractors and small businesses who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills. Now remember what the President said last night -- don't boo, vote.

People who did the work and needed the money, and didn't get it -- not because he couldn't pay them, but because he wouldn't pay them. He just stiffed them. That sales pitch he's making to be your president? Put your faith in him -- and you'll win big? That's the same sales pitch he made to all those small businesses.

Then Trump walked away, and left working people holding the bag.

He also talks a big game about putting America First. Please explain to me what part of America First leads him to make Trump ties in China, not Colorado. Trump suits in Mexico, not Michigan. Trump furniture in Turkey, not Ohio. Trump picture frames in India, not Wisconsin.

Donald Trump says he wants to make America great again -- well, he could start by actually making things in America again.

The choice we face is just as stark when it comes to our national security. Anyone reading the news can see the threats and turbulence we face.

From Baghdad and Kabul, to Nice and Paris and Brussels, to San Bernardino and Orlando, we're dealing with determined enemies that must be defeated. No wonder people are anxious and looking for reassurance. Looking for steady leadership. You want a leader who understands we are stronger when we work with our allies around the world and care for our veterans here at home. Keeping our nation safe and honoring the people who do it will be my highest priority.

I'm proud that we put a lid on Iran's nuclear program without firing a single shot -- now we have to enforce it, and keep supporting Israel's security.

I'm proud that we shaped a global climate agreement -- now we have to hold every country accountable to their commitments, including ourselves.

I'm proud to stand by our allies in NATO against any threat they face, including from Russia.

I've laid out my strategy for defeating ISIS. We will strike their sanctuaries from the air, and support local forces taking them out on the ground. We will surge our intelligence so that we detect and prevent attacks before they happen. We will disrupt their efforts online to reach and radicalize young people in our country. It won't be easy or quick, but make no mistake -- we will prevail.

Now Donald Trump says, and this is a quote, "I know more about ISIS than the generals do."

No, Donald, you don't. He thinks that he knows more than our military because he claimed our armed forces are "a disaster."

Well, I've had the privilege to work closely with our troops and our veterans for many years, including as a Senator on the Armed Services Committee. I know how wrong he is.

Our military is a national treasure. We entrust our commander-in-chief to make the hardest decisions our nation faces. Decisions about war and peace. Life and death.

A president should respect the men and women who risk their lives to serve our country -- including Captain Khan and the sons of Tim Kaine and Mike Pence, both Marines.

Ask yourself: Does Donald Trump have the temperament to be Commander-in-Chief? Donald Trump can't even handle the rough-and-tumble of a presidential campaign. He loses his cool at the slightest provocation. When he's gotten a tough question from a reporter. When he's challenged in a debate. When he sees a protestor at a rally. Imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis. A man you can bait with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons.

I can't put it any better than Jackie Kennedy did after the Cuban Missile Crisis. She said that what worried President Kennedy during that very dangerous time was that a war might be started -- not by big men with self-control and restraint, but by little men -- the ones moved by fear and pride.

America's strength doesn't come from lashing out. Strength relies on smarts, judgment, cool resolve, and the precise and strategic application of power. That's the kind of Commander-in-Chief I pledge to be.

And if we're serious about keeping our country safe, we also can't afford to have a President who's in the pocket of the gun lobby. I'm not here to repeal the 2nd Amendment. I'm not here to take away your guns. I just don't want you to be shot by someone who shouldn't have a gun in the first place.

We should be working with responsible gun owners to pass common-sense reforms and keep guns out of the hands of criminals, terrorists and all others who would do us harm.

For decades, people have said this issue was too hard to solve and the politics were too hot to touch. But I ask you: how can we just stand by and do nothing? You heard, you saw, family members of people killed by gun violence. You heard, you saw, family members of police officers killed in the line of duty because they were outgunned by criminals. I refuse to believe we can't find common ground here.

We have to heal the divides in our country. Not just on guns. But on race. Immigration. And more. That starts with listening to each other. Hearing each other. Trying, as best we can, to walk in each other's shoes.

So let's put ourselves in the shoes of young black and Latino men and women who face the effects of systemic racism, and are made to feel like their lives are disposable.

Let's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers, kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to do a dangerous and necessary job. We will reform our criminal justice system from end-to-end, and rebuild trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve.

We will defend all our rights -- civil rights, human rights and voting rights women's rights and workers' rights LGBT rights and the rights of people with disabilities!

And we will stand up against mean and divisive rhetoric wherever it comes from. You know, for the past year, many people made the mistake of laughing off Donald Trump's comments -- excusing him as an entertainer just putting on a show. They think he couldn't possibly mean all the horrible things he says -- like when he called women "pigs."

Or said that an American judge couldn't be fair because of his Mexican heritage. Or when he mocks and mimics a reporter with a disability. Or insults prisoners of war like John McCain --a true hero and patriot who deserves our respect.

At first, I admit, I couldn't believe he meant it either. It was just too hard to fathom -- that someone who wants to lead our nation could say those things. Could be like that.

But here's the sad truth: There is no other Donald Trump...This is it. And in the end, it comes down to what Donald Trump doesn't get: that America is great -- because America is good.

So enough with the bigotry and bombast. Donald Trump's not offering real change. He's offering empty promises. What are we offering? A bold agenda to improve the lives of people across our country - to keep you safe, to get you good jobs, and to give your kids the opportunities they deserve. The choice is clear, my friends.

Every generation of Americans has come together to make our country freer, fairer, and stronger. None of us ever have or can do it alone.

I know that at a time when so much seems to be pulling us apart, it can be hard to imagine how we'll ever pull together again. But I'm here to tell you tonight -- progress is possible. I know because I've seen it in the lives of people across America who get knocked down and get right back up. And I know it from my own life.

More than a few times, I've had to pick myself up and get back in the game. Like so much else, I got this from my mother. She never let me back down from any challenge. When I tried to hide from a neighborhood bully, she literally blocked the door. "Go back out there," she said. And she was right. You have to stand up to bullies.

You have to keep working to make things better, even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce.

We lost our mother a few years ago but I miss her every day. And I still hear her voice urging me to keep working and to keep fighting for right, no matter what. That's what we need to do together as a nation.

And though "we may not live to see the glory," as the song from the musical Hamilton goes, "let us gladly join the fight." Let our legacy be about "planting seeds in a garden you never get to see."

That's why we're here...not just in this hall, but on this Earth. The Founders showed us that. And so have many others since. They were drawn together by love of country and the selfless passion to build something better for all who follow. That is the story of America. And we begin a new chapter tonight.

Yes, the world is watching what we do. Yes, America's destiny is ours to choose. So let's be stronger together, my fellow Americans. Let's look to the future with courage and confidence. Let's build a better tomorrow for our beloved children and our beloved country. And when we do, America will be greater than ever.

Thank you and may God bless you and the United States of America!

Thank you, Tampa! Thank you all. Thank you so much. Whoa. Are we ready to go win an election in November? Well, I think after the last week, what we saw in Cleveland, we'd better be ready to go win an election in November.

I want to thank Delia for those wonderful words about her life growing up here in Tampa and her strong endorsement. I want to thank my longtime friend and my colleague from the Senate, your Senator Bill Nelson. I also want to thank your great mayor, Mayor Bob Buckhorn. I also have a few others to thank, because I'm thrilled to have so many strong Florida leaders here with us today County Commissioner Les Miller; former Governor and soon-to-be congressman Charlie Crist; former Mayor Sandy Freedman; and we've got a great group of state representatives, councilmembers, and so many more, and I am grateful to each and every one of you who are here with us.

I've got to tell you, did any of you watch that convention in Cleveland? (Boos.) Well, it was kind of perversely flattering. It's hard to believe they spent so much time talking about me and no time talking about jobs or education or health care. No matter what your political leanings, I think we can all agree that never in the history of conventions, certainly, but I think even more broadly, have we moved forward together by pointing fingers and scapegoating and blaming people instead of rolling up our sleeves, getting a plan together, and then working to achieve it.

Now, I mean, something has gone terribly wrong when one speaker says "vote your conscience' and gets booed. I mean, I never thought I would say these words, but Ted Cruz was right. In this election, do the right thing and vote your conscience vote for your future; vote for a United States of America.

Now, look, I think many of us felt that those speakers, including of course their nominee, were not talking about the country we know and love. They weren't talking about the work people do every day, the opportunities we try to seize, neighbors helping neighbors. I didn't hear any of that. Instead, I heard about Donald Trump's dark and divisive vision. Last night's speech took it to a whole new level. He offered a lot of fear and anger and resentment, but no solutions about anything that he even talked about.

He didn't have a jobs program, did he? All that talk about keeping people safe; I didn't hear any plans about what he's going to do to support our police, to make sure that we are all working together. You could listen to that speech and you could think, my goodness, he believes America is in decline. And I've got to say, as he said this last night, I was pretty shocked. He said, "I alone can fix it.' Now, just think about that for a minute, because it's really important. His vision of America is one where we Americans are kind of helpless, we need to be rescued. I can't really imagine him on a white horse, but that seems to be what he's telling us: "I alone can fix it.' Well, he doesn't understand that Americans, we Americans, we are strong, big-hearted, results-oriented, generous people in America.

I've spent a lot of time, a lot of wonderful times, traveling across our country, and I've seen people fixing all kinds of things. I've met educators like Delia, working with teachers and parents to turn around schools and give kids a better chance. I've met small businesses and entrepreneurs who get up every day and work really hard. And you know when they make a contract for their goods or their services, they expect to be paid. I've met so many wonderful men and women who serve in our military; they know their job, they know the grave responsibility that they fulfill, and they get up every day and they do their best. But I've never heard one of them say, "Oh, I can fix it alone.'

I was in Orlando before I came here to Tampa. And I had the great honor of sitting and talking with some of the residents of that beautiful city, and hearing what they are doing together to deal with the aftermath of the worst mass shooting in American history. The mayor spoke with great pride about how his city had responded. The police captain in charge of the SWAT team talked with such conviction about how when the moment arrived, the police in Orlando were ready. They had trained. They supported each other. They were ready. The captain didn't say, "I can fix it alone.' He said, "I'm a member of a team the best team that anybody could have.'

I met some of the hospital and the medical personnel who were there to take the wounded and worked so heroically to save lives, every one of them doing his or her part triage, nursing doing everything. I didn't meet any one of them who said, "Hey, I can fix it alone.'

I've never heard of an American leader, or at least someone who wants to be an American leader, claiming that he's all we need. That's not a democracy, my friends. As I recall, we had a revolution to make sure we didn't have someone who said, "I can fix it alone.'

The other thing he said that really shocked me it is hard to know where to start, isn't it? Well, last night Donald told us, "I am your voice.' Well, I don't think he speaks for most Americans, do you? He doesn't speak for small businesses like the ones he has consistently stiffed and driven into bankruptcy and financial peril. He doesn't speak for the workmen that he's employed on his various projects and then refused to pay them. He doesn't speak for the housekeepers and the cooks and everybody working at a hotel in Las Vegas that he owns that have voted to have a union and he refuses to even talk to them. He doesn't speak for immigrants; he only speaks against immigrants. He doesn't speak for people with disabilities. He doesn't speak for our military, which he has insulted consistently, and in particular, prisoners of war who sacrifice much of their life because they serve us. And contrary to what they tried to say at their convention, I don't think he speaks for women. I don't think he speaks for working families who would be devastated by his reckless economic policies. He doesn't speak for anyone who thinks our country should be standing together not splintering apart. He sure doesn't speak for me, because I know we are stronger together and that's what we're going to be next year.

Now, starting on Monday in Philadelphia, we will offer a very different vision. It's about building bridges, not walls, between people. It's about making the economy work for everyone not just those at the top. It's about embracing our diversity that does make our country great.

I have to tell you, in Orlando today, in listening to people who had been there that night, meeting a mother whose son died, meeting others who barely escaped after hiding from the killer, sitting around a table with leaders of the LGBT community, leader of the SWAT team, a county commissioner, and a Muslim imam who has been embracing the LGBT community, I was so proud, I was so proud. But well, I'm proud of everybody in this country who gets up every day and makes a contribution and does your part. And what the folks in Orlando said to me was so touching. They said, "We have to stand against hatred no matter who it's against' racial hatred, religious hatred, homophobia, xenophobia all of these hates that infect the soul. And we have to stand against violence everywhere, and that includes standing up for common sense gun safety measures.

I want to say something else, I really do, because this is serious to me. I love this country. I am so grateful for all the opportunities and blessings I've had, and I am so humbled by the prospect of being nominated next week in Philadelphia. But here's what I want you to hear: I will do everything I can to make life better for hardworking Americans. I will do everything I can to bring people together. I will do everything I can to keep us safe, and I know a little bit about that.

Now, you can't put this you can't really put this into law is what I'm about to say, but we need more love and kindness in this country. We need more respect between and among our fellow Americans. We need to be listening more to each other. The last thing we need are leaders who try to divide us even more than we are. We should be working to reach out to those who are different from us. Our differences, which make up our diversity, makes the United States the strongest, best positioned country in the world for the 21st century.

I am proud to be an American, and I want to be sure that our children and our grandchildren have the same pride and the same opportunity to have the access to the American dream that so many of us have had so that they too can enjoy the fruits of freedom and liberty, justice and equality and opportunity.

Now, look, I understand that there is a constituency for the fear and the anger that we saw last week. I know there are people who are feeling insecure and anxious about their lives, about their futures. They worry that maybe they're not going to have as a high a standard of living as their parents or grandparents or as they themselves hoped. I know that there's a lot of angst about all the changes that are happening in the world technology, globalization. I understand all that. And I respect those who have legitimate concerns and questions.

But I've never known America to quit on ourselves. I've never known us to give up in the face of tough challenges. I've never known us to basically retreat into the kind of isolationism that was being advertised at their convention. That is not who we are. Those are not the values that made this a great country. And don't ever forget: We are a great country already!

Now, can we do better? Of course we can. Can we be fairer? Can we provide more ladders of opportunity? Yes, we can. And that's exactly what I intend to do if I'm given the great privilege of being your president. I will work every single day to make your dreams come true, to make you believe that America's future can be even better than our past. We are a forward-looking nation, aren't we? And I know that if we set our goals and we work to achieve them, we will. It has always been thus. This country has always delivered for the American people.

Now, we've had some challenging times. We've taken some detours. It took a long time for some people to be given the same rights as everybody else. We know that. But there is no place on Earth that historically has continued to move forward towards that more perfect union. The last thing we need is somebody running for president who talks trash about America.

So I hope you know that this campaign is really going to take a lot of work. I hope you will join us. I hope you will take your phones out and text, "join,' J-O-I-N, 47246, or go to my website, hillaryclinton.com, to get involved. And I want to tell you this, especially the young and young at heart. We are hiring organizers right here in Florida. If you would like to apply, go to that website. We want the very most energetic, enthusiastic people because our success in the I-4 corridor is essential to our winning.

And I'm excited about this campaign because I believe that when it's all said and done, all of the scary speeches with all the side effects are over, people have stopped yelling at us at the top of their lungs like they did all week, that we will choose to be stronger together. That's what I'm counting on. That's what I, in my heart, believe, is the right course for our country. It is the only course, the only course that leads us with confidence and optimism into the future. And I know that we are up to the task. I know we are. And particularly to all the young people who are here today, every election is always about the future. This election is truly about your future.

So today in Orlando, when I asked everybody around the table what they wanted, what they needed, they basically said, "We need people to understand what we've gone through, to be there for us for the long term, to help us help all those who were affected in all the families, and we need to stand up against hate and divisiveness.' And the best way I can sum up what I hope this election will lead to the conclusion we will reach together in November and the work we will do for the next four years-- is it really is great to be among so many optimistic people but here's what I here is what I want you to remember. My last thought for you today. Just remember, love trumps hate.

Wow, it is so great being here with all of you today. Thank you. I love you all too. I am so glad to see you gathered here.

I want to thank your President, Roger Rocha, and your Executive Director, Brent Wilkes, and let's give another round of applause to Lizeth for sharing her story. I believe that more people in our country need to hear from Lizeth and other DREAMers across America. These young people are so important to our future. I told her I was really proud of her and I'm sure that her family and her parents in particular are very proud as well.

And thank all of you for helping to make LULAC the united and energized organization it is today. For 87 years, you have been on the frontlines. Now I haven't been around all of those 87 years, but I am proud to stand alongside you for part of that journey. There are a lot of people I know in this audience: people who have served as President and officers at LULAC, women who have led the women's movement here out of LULAC.

Back in the '90s, we worked together to achieve universal health care. We fought the good fight. And when were defeated, we got right back up, and you helped us pass the Children's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million children in America today. I remember this very well because I worked with your leadership.

Back then, LULAC made signs that read, "Let's move forward with Clinton.' Now, I found that very flattering. But I asked back then if we could please change the signs to "Let's move forward together.' Because that was more accurate. Because everything we achieved, we achieved together.

And that's how we're going to write the next chapter of the American story, to put opportunity within reach of every family. We are going to do that together. And I for one, want, I want all Americans, from all backgrounds, to help chart that future. And I hope and expect that Latinos will play a leading role.

Now you know this, but it bears repeating, you represent one of the fastest growing minority groups in America. By 2050, communities of color will represent the majority of our population. So of course Latinos have to help us shape the future of America because you are the future of America.

Now I know from my own work going back decades that when we invest in this community when we make it easier for Latinos to get an education, compete for jobs, start and grow new businesses and pursue your dreams all of America benefits.

That's why I'm making to you two commitments for what I'll do in the first 100 days of my Administration.

First, we will make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II with support specifically for Latino-owned small businesses.

And I will also introduce legislation for comprehensive immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship.

These two top priorities are what I have heard as I have traveled across the country, meeting with groups large and small. People who say, "Hey we want to succeed, we want to start a small business, we want to create more opportunity.' And we need once and for all to end the vicious debate about comprehensive immigration reform.

So first, with respect to jobs. We need to create an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. And we have to do this together as well. You know that better than anyone. Latinos are 17 percent of our country's population but you hold only 2 percent of its wealth. There's a disconnect here. We've got to connect more Latinos with good jobs that pay good wages, with more opportunities to go to college, like Lizeth, to launch new ventures, and build wealth that you can pass on to your kids. Now, there are lots of ways of doing that, aren't there? Well, one of the best ways is to face the fact that America's infrastructure is crumbling.

We need to rebuild. And we need to build our clean energy infrastructure, so we can increase efficiency, cut costs for consumers, and compete and win in the 21st-century green economy. It just so happens that more than a quarter of all construction jobs in America are held by Latinos. My plan will create thousands more jobs in these sectors, putting people to work rebuilding America. That is about the kind of future that we want together.

And I have a special place in my heart for small businesses. My dad was a small businessman, very small. But he worked so hard and gave us a very solid, middle class life.

So I want to do more to support Latino-owned small businesses, which have created so many jobs and so much growth across America. I have a plan to cut red tape, increase access to capital, and invest $25 billion to support innovation in communities that need that the most. That's what we will do together. While we're doing all that, creating these jobs, which is good for everybody in America.

While we're at it, let's finally give workers a raise. It's time to raise the minimum wage. No one who works full-time in America should ever live in poverty. The presumptive Republican nominee doesn't believe we need to raise the minimum wage. In fact he has said wages are too high in America. Yes, exactly.

And you know what else we need to do? We need to close the gender pay gap. This inequality of pay affects all women, but it is hardest on women of color. And hardest most of all on Latinas. On average, Latinas earn just 55 cents for every dollar earned by a white man. That is just outrageous. I know you understand this, and I am going to campaign on this across America in front of every audience. Because one of the fastest ways to raise income is to ensure equal pay. And people who say to me, "Well that's a woman's issue' are missing the whole point. If you have a mother, a wife, a sister, or a daughter who is not being paid fairly, it's your issue, it's a family issue and it's an American economic issue.

And at a time when education is more important than ever, let's make sure no one is forced to give up their dream of going to college because they can't afford to pay. Over the last 20 years the number of Latinas going to college has tripled. We should applaud, that is a big accomplishment. Yet here is the catch, Latinos are still less likely than their white peers to graduate, often because they can't afford to. That's heartbreaking, isn't it?

I think we've gone backwards in many ways. We don't provide enough help to students who really need it. My plan will change that. We're going to make community college free. And we're going to make public universities debt free.

Now here's what that means. For families making less than $125,000 a year, we will eliminate tuition altogether at public colleges and universities. We will also help those of you who already have debt refinance it and pay it back with more help.

Now, also, in my first 100 days, as part of my commitment, I will introduce comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship. I want to say I know how painful it was when the Supreme Court made the decision it made. So many families had hoped that it would be different. And there is a lot of worry and concern across our country. So let me say this. We do, in my opinion, have a consensus that something must be done. Whether we get it done will depend on this election.

For a long time the question of whether to reform our immigration system was hotly contested. Now there's greater agreement, except in some circles. I deeply regret the kind of campaign the presumptive Republican nominee started with and is still running today. So part of what we have to be strong in standing for is a credible path forward for reform that is truly comprehensive, addressing all aspects of the system, including immigrants living here today, those who wish to come in the days ahead, from highly-skilled workers to family members, to those seeking refuge from violence, wherever that might occur.

To families, this is an issue that matters more than we can measure. So there's nothing that I take more seriously.

I will send a proposal to Congress that will include a path to citizenship. That will fix the family visa backlog and strengthen our economy. And will enable our country to be what it's always been a place where people from around the world can come to start new businesses, pursue their dreams, apply their talents to American growth and innovation.

And while we're doing that, we must do everything we can to keep families already here together.

So when the Supreme Court put DAPA on hold, and that affected 5 million immigrants, and it was devastating for millions of families. But it's important to note the Court did not actually rule on the substance of the case. I've said throughout this campaign that DAPA is squarely within the President's authority. And I will keep saying that and fighting for it.

There's more we can do. We need a simple, straightforward system where people with sympathetic cases or can show a history of service to their communities can make their case, and be eligible for deferred action. Like people who experience and report extreme labor abuses.

And we absolutely must end family detention, close private detention facilities, stop the raids and round-ups. These actions are not consistent with our values. Too many children in our country say goodbye to their parents every morning, not knowing if Mom or Dad will be there when they get home. I know how important family is, and I want to do everything I can as President to keep families together. That's one of the many reasons to finally get immigration reform through. There's nothing more important to these families that live in fear and anxiety.

Now jobs and immigration reform are just two of the issues that are at stake in this election. What happens this November really matters my friends. Now, I think that's true in every Presidential election. But this one is different, isn't it?

We're not just choosing a President and Commander in Chief this fall. The choice we make will say a lot about who we are and whether we understand and celebrate the diversity in our country, which makes us all the stronger.

After the last election, the Republicans commissioned a major report, telling them everything they did wrong and what they'd need to do in order to win next time. One of the conclusions of that report was that Republicans had to work harder to appeal to Latino voters.

Next week in Cleveland, they will nominate someone who thinks "Latino outreach' is tweeting a picture of a taco bowl.

What a difference a few years makes.

Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States.

Let's just remember why that is so. In the first weeks of his campaign, he said that immigrants from Mexico are drug dealers, rapists, murderers, carriers of infectious disease.

He referred to a Latina contestant in his Miss Universe pageant as "Miss Housekeeping.'

He insists and I quote "this is a country where we speak English, not Spanish.' Well I have to tell you he doesn't know much about our history and what a great opportunity we give to people from everywhere to come to this country. He criticized Jeb Bush for speaking quote --"Mexican.' You can't make this up.

He wants to revoke the citizenship of 4 million Americans born in this country to immigrant parents, eliminate the bedrock principle in the 14th Amendment of the Constitution that if you're born in America, you're a citizen of America. Now, I don't know if you read about his visit recently to Capitol Hill to try to assuage the concerns of some of the House and Senate members. But he was asked a serious question by one of those members what did he think about Article I of the Constitution and the powers that it described. He said, "I like Article 1, Article II, Article XII.'

Well, there is no Article XII. I kind of have this old-fashioned idea that if you raise your hand to be sworn in as President to defend and protect the Constitution of the United States, you should know what is in the Constitution of the United States.

Now, I often mention the 11 million people he wants to round up and deport. But if you add in the more than 4 million Americans whose citizenship he wants to revoke, it's closer to 16 million. Never mind that this crazy idea could cost us nearly a trillion dollars in economic output. He is talking about undoing a fundamental value of our nation.

Then there are his attacks against Judge Curiel, the distinguished judge in the fraud lawsuit against the so-called Trump University. Judge Curiel was born in Indiana. Last time I checked, it was part of the United States. His parents were born in Mexico. So, as far as Donald's concerned, that means Judge Curiel can't be trusted to do his job. He says that the judge should be disqualified because of his, and I quote, "Mexican heritage.' Those are his words. He called him a "Mexican judge' over and over again. It was a cynical, calculated attempt to fan the flames of racial division. And also to undermine people's faith in our judicial system. Why would someone running for President want to do that?

Even the Republican Speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, called Trump's comments, "the textbook definition of a racist comment.'

I will say what Donald Trump won't say. Judge Curiel is as American as I am. And as American as Donald Trump is.

So just listen closely because when Trump talks about making America great again, that is code for taking us back to a time when racial minorities, and women, were marginalized, ostracized, treated as less than the full citizens, the full participants, the full human beings that we are.

Now he's making unfortunately, an impression on our children, too

or dad or teacher about how to talk to their kids about Trump. In one recent survey, two-thirds of teachers reported that their students especially those from immigrant families feel afraid about what this election will mean for their futures.

When our kids are scared by our policy debates, that's a sign something has gone badly off the rails.

It matters when at a high school sporting event in Indiana and Wisconsin, Latino teenagers are subjected to chants of "Build the wall!' And "Speak English.'

Donald Trump is running the most divisive campaign of our lifetimes. His message is that you should be afraid afraid of people whose ethnicity is different, whose religious faith is different, or who were born in a different country.

That's, my friends, no innuendo or dog-whistle anymore. It's all out in the open now.

So we have to come back twice as strong and twice as clear.

We have to say with one voice that Latinos are a vital part of the American community.

And we saw that so tragically again last week.

When shots rang out in Dallas last week, brave police officers ran into the gunfire. One of them was a man named Patrick Zamarripa. He was a Navy veteran. He served three tours in Iraq. He had a 2-year old daughter. And he was very proud of his Mexican heritage. On July 4th, in what would turn out to be his final tweet, this is what he wrote: "Happy Birthday to the greatest country on the face of this planet. My beloved America!'

That is the Latino community. Loving. Dedicated. Proud. Patriotic.

Whether you're Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Afro-Latino, from Central or South America, whether your family just arrived or has been here since before the United States even existed, we are brothers and sisters, and I will be your champion. We are not strangers. You are not intruders. You're our neighbors, our colleagues, our friends, our families. You make our nation stronger, smarter, and more creative. I want you to know I see you, I hear you, and I am with you.

And together, together we must send a resounding message to Donald Trump in November and earn a decisive mandate against demagoguery and fear. It's not enough to just complain, it's not enough to talk to friends and neighbors or make speeches. We need to inspire a level of turnout that will help us win up and down the ticket.

That will lead to more supportive state and local officials, who can put a stop to aggressive, anti-immigration measures. That will lead to more Senators and Representatives helping us craft immigration reform, and a Congress that will actually pass it.

So I'm going to work my heart out, but I need your help. I need you at my side. Because this is your election. That's why the work that LULAC is doing to help register voters is so critical. That's why I'm fighting for automatic voter registration.

When you leave this conference please go home and figure out what you can do to be a part of the LULAC registration movement. Let's move forward together once more, toward a future built on the "kindness and compassion' that Cesar Chavez envisioned, toward the "social change' that Dolores Huerta marched for, toward a future that reflects that simple, timeless notion that all of us are equal.

Judge Curiel is an American. Patrick Zamarripa was an American. Lizeth is an American.

We are all proud Americans.

And the promise of America is big enough for all of us.

Let's go forth and make that clear in the election of 2016. Thank you. God bless you!

Hello! Hi. Thank you all very, very much, please be seated, it's wonderful being back here. It's always a special privilege having grown up in Chicago in the suburbs to be here in the state capitol and especially here in this great historic place filled with so much meaning, not just for Illinois but for our country. And I'm delighted to have this opportunity to talk with you about the state of our country today.

Nearly 160 years ago, Abraham Lincoln gave a speech in this statehouse that marked a turning point in the political life of our nation.

The question of slavery was being fiercely debated across America. Roughly half the states allowed it. Half abolished it. And some people -- including Lincoln -- believed that until it was gone entirely, our country would never be truly united and at peace.

So on June 16, 1858, when Mr. Lincoln kicked off his campaign for the United States Senate, he delivered an address on how slavery was tearing our country apart. And that it must go. Some thought that he ended up losing that Senate race because of that speech. But then he won the Presidency. And some thought it was because of that speech.

President Lincoln led America during the most challenging period in our nation's history. He defended our Union, our Constitution, and the ideal of a nation "conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.' His legacy included laws and amendments that enshrined those values for future generations. They protect and guide us still.

I'm here today, in this place, because the words Lincoln spoke all those years ago still hold resonance for us now.

Remember, he said, "A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect,' he went on, "The Union to be dissolved; I do not expect the house to fall. But I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing or all the other.'
The challenges we face today do not approach those of Lincoln's time. Not even close. And we should be very clear about that.

But recent events have left people across America asking hard questions about whether we are still a house divided.

Despite our best efforts and highest hopes, America's long struggle with race is far from finished. In just the past week, we saw black men killed by police and five police officers killed by a sniper targeting white police. There is too much violence and hate in our country. Too little trust and common ground. It can feel impossible to have the conversations we need to have, to fix what's broken.

And despite being the richest country on earth, we have too much economic inequality -- and that also undermines the foundation of our democracy.

Lincoln understood that threat, too. He deeply believed everyone deserved -- in his words -- "a fair chance in the race of life.' He saw it as a defining feature of the United States, and believed it was vital that hard-working people be free to enjoy the fruits of their own labor. It's one of the reasons he was so strongly against slavery -- because it violated that entire notion. And as President, he took pains to use the tools of government to create more economic opportunity for Americans at every level of society. So, too, must we fight inequality and create opportunity in our time -- not just for some Americans, but for all.

So I come today as a mother and a grandmother to two beautiful little children. Who, I want them and all our children to grow up in a country where violence like the kind we saw last week doesn't happen again -- and where the American Dream is big enough for everyone.

I'm also here as a candidate for President who is deeply concerned about the divisions that still hold our people apart and our nation back. I believe that our future peace and prosperity depends on whether we meet this moment with honesty and courage.

That means taking a hard look at our laws and our attitudes. It means embracing policies that promote justice for all people, and standing firm against any attempt to roll back the clock on the rights and opportunities that so many sacrificed so much to secure.

And all of that starts with doing a better job of listening to each other.
We need to listen to the families whose loved ones have been killed in police incidents. Alton Sterling and Philando Castile are just the latest in a long and painful litany of African Americans dying after encounters with police officers. We remember Laquan McDonald, killed in Chicago a year and a half ago and Sandra Bland, who grew up in Illinois who died one year ago today. Time after time, no one is held accountable. And surely we can all agree that's deeply wrong and needs to change.

And yes we do need to listen to those who say "Black Lives Matter.' Too many black Americans, especially young men, feel like their lives are disposable. And they worry every single day about what might happen. They have reason to feel that way. And it's absolutely unacceptable. Everyone in America, everyone deserves to be treated with respect and dignity. Surely that is something we can all unite behind.

We need to acknowledge the five Latinos who also lost their lives in police incidents last week. Their stories didn't get national media coverage, but their families and communities are mourning too.

And at the same time, we need to listen to the dedicated, principled police officers working hard every day to rebuild trust with the communities they serve and protect. Our men and women in blue put their lives on the line everyday to keep us safe and keep our democracy strong. Remember what Michael Krol, Michael Smith, Lorne Ahrens, Brent Thompson and Patrick Zamarripa were doing when they died. They were protecting a peaceful march. They were people cloaked in authority making sure their fellow citizens could exercise their right to protest authority. And there's nothing more vital to our democracy than that. And they gave their lives for it.

David Brown, the Dallas police chief, said that when it comes to overcoming systemic racism and so many other problems in society, we ask too much of the police and too little of everyone else. I think he's absolutely right. This is our problem, and we all need to work together to solve it.

We also need to listen to the families crying out for relief from gun violence. President Obama's trip to Dallas yesterday was the 11th time he has spoken to a city in mourning after a mass shooting. The wrong people keep getting their hands on guns. And not just any guns -- military weapons, like the kind that the Dallas killer had, which allowed him to outgun the police. And the vast majority of gun owners agree: we have to come together around common sense steps to prevent gun violence. If we're looking for common ground -- this is common ground. And I hope that we will, from Washington, to Springfield to everywhere across America, come to agreement about that.

Now I understand that just saying these things together may upset some people. I'm talking about police reform just a few days after a horrific attack on police officers. I'm talking about courageous, honorable police officers just a few days after officer-involved shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota. I'm bringing up guns in a country where just talking about comprehensive background checks and getting assault weapons off our streets gets you demonized.

But all these things can be true at the same time.

We do need criminal justice reform to save lives and to make sure all Americans are treated as equals in rights and dignity. We do need to support our police departments that are trying to get it right, and honor the men and women who protect us every day. We do need to do more to stop gun violence. We may disagree about how to do these things, but surely we can all agree with those basic premises.

And I hope and pray the past week has showed us how true they are.

Now, these are the issues on many of our minds right now. And if we stop there, that would leave us with plenty of work to do.

So I wish I could say that was everything that we must address.

But these events are taking place against a much broader backdrop of fear and anxiety. So I think we have to face all of it.

We do need to make sure our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top. The changes that have roiled our economy over the past few decades are not just numbers on a page that economists study. They are real forces that families are dealing with up close and personal every day.

Not long ago, I met with factory workers here in Illinois whose jobs are being sent abroad, and heard how painful the consequences have been for them and their families. I've talked to workers across our country who've seen good jobs lost to technologies, who keep being told to get more training -- even though that often doesn't lead to a good new job on the other end.

These economic disruptions have stripped too many people of their sense of security and dignity. And that can have devastating consequences. We have to ask ourselves, why are drug addiction and suicide on the rise in parts of our country? That's not just about economics. It's about something deeper, that is connected to economics: a sense of dislocation, even a pessimism about whether America still holds anything for them or cares about them at all.

That's why I've pledged that in my first 100 days as President, we will make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. We need more jobs you can support a family on, especially in places that have been left out and left behind from Coal Country to Indian Country to inner cities, to every place that's been hollowed out when a factory closed or a mine shut down because everyone in America deserves that "fair chance in the race of life' that President Lincoln described.

Now, I realize that our politics have contributed to the sense of division many Americans feel right now. And as someone in the middle of a hotly fought political campaign, I cannot stand here and claim that my words and actions haven't sometimes fueled the partisanship that often stands in the way of progress. So I recognize I have to do better too.

I'm running for President with the belief that we need to face up to these challenges and fix them in order to become a stronger, fairer country. And in times like these, we need a President who can help pull us together, not split us apart.

And that is why I believe Donald Trump is so dangerous.

His campaign is as divisive as any we have seen in our lifetimes. It is built on stoking mistrust and pitting American against American. It's there in everything he says and everything he promises to do as President.

It's there in how he wants to ban Muslims from coming to the United States, and toyed with creating a database to track Muslims in America. It's there in the way he demeans women, in his promotion of an anti-Semitic image pushed by neo-Nazis, and in the months that he spent trying to discredit the citizenship and legitimacy of our first black President. Last night in an interview, he said that he understands systemic bias against black people because -- and I quote -- "even against me, the system is rigged' -- unquote. He went on to say, "I can relate to it very much myself.' Even this -- the killing of people -- is somehow all about him.

It's there in his proposals on immigration. He says he'll round up 11 million people and kick them out. He's actually described a special deportation force that would go around America, pulling people out of their homes and workplaces, pulling children out of school. I got a letter from a mother the other day who said her adopted son asked her with a shaky voice if President Trump would send him back to Ethiopia. When kids are scared by political candidates and policy debates, it's a sign something has gone badly wrong.

And we see it in the violence that Donald Trump encouraged toward protesters at his rallies, and the strange things he has said about the violence that will occur if we don't elect him. He says that if he doesn't win this November, we -- and again I quote -- "won't even have a country anymore,' America's "not going to continue to survive.' I do not know what he's talking about. But I do know we don't need that kind of fear-mongering -- not now, not ever.

And he's gone even further even than that. He has taken aim at some of our most cherished democratic values and institutions. He wants to revoke the citizenship of 4 million Americans born in this country to immigrant parents, and eliminate the bedrock principle enshrined in the 14th Amendment -- that if you're born in America, you're a citizen of America. He said that a distinguished American, born in Indiana, a judge can't be trusted to do his job because his parents were Mexican; he called him a "Mexican judge' over and over again. He knew that the judge had been born in Indiana. But it was a cynical, calculated attempt to fan the flames of racial division. And designed to undermine people's faith in our judicial system. Why would someone running for President want to do that?

And even that's not all. He says, as Commander-in-Chief, he would order our troops to commit war crimes, and insisted they would follow his orders, even though that goes against decades of military training and the military code. He's banished members of the press who have criticized him -- is there any doubt he would do the same as President? Imagine if he had not just Twitter and cable news to go after his critics and opponents, but also the IRS -- or for that matter, our entire military. Given what we have seen and heard, do any of us think he'd be restrained?

And he has shown contempt for and ignorance of our Constitution. Last week, he met with House Republicans in Washington to try to assuage their serious concerns about him. One member asked whether he'd protect Article I, which defines the separation of powers between Congress and the executive branch. Here's the answer he reportedly gave: "I want to protect Article One, Article Two, Article Twelve.' Well here's the thing -- there is no Article Twelve -- not even close. That was a serious question, from an elected representative, and he either didn't care enough to answer it seriously -- or he didn't know where to begin.

Even the most stalwart Republicans were alarmed by that. And well they, and we, should be.

The first thing a new President does is take an oath to "protect and defend' the Constitution. To do that with any meaning, you've got to know what's in it. And you've got to respect what's in it.

I do wish Donald Trump would listen to other people once in awhile. He might actually learn something. But he's made it clear -- that's not his thing. As he has said, he only listens to himself.

This man is the nominee of the Party of Lincoln. We are watching it become the Party of Trump. And that's not just a huge loss for our democracy -- it is a threat to it.

Because Donald Trump's campaign adds up to an ugly, dangerous message to America. A message that you should be afraid -- afraid of people whose ethnicity is different, or religious faith is different, or who were born in a different country or hold different political beliefs.

Make no mistake -- there are things to fear in this world, and we need to be clear-eyed about them. But we are each other's countrymen and women. We share this miraculous country. This land and its heritage is yours, mine and everyone's -- willing to pledge allegiance and understand the solemn responsibilities of American citizenship. That's what "indivisible' means -- that big word that every grade school student knows -- that we're in this together, even if that's not always easy.

So let's think better of each other. Let's hold together in the face of our challenges -- not turn on each other or tear each other down.

Let's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers, kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to a dangerous job we need them to do.

Let's put ourselves in the shoes of African Americans and Latinos, and try as best we can to imagine what it would be like if we had to have "the talk' with our kids about how carefully they need to act because the slightest wrong move could get them hurt or killed.

And yes, let's put ourselves in the shoes of Donald Trump's supporters. We may disagree on the causes and the solutions to the challenges we face -- but I believe like anyone else, they're trying to figure out their place in a fast-changing America.

They want to know how to make a good living and how to give their kids better futures and opportunities. That's why we've got to reclaim the promise of America for all our people -- no matter who they vote for.
And let's be more than allies to each other. Let's take on each other's struggles as our own.

My life's work is built on the conviction that we are stronger together. Not separated into factions or sides. Not shouting over each other, but together. Our economy is stronger when everyone contributes to it, and everyone can benefit from the work they do. Our communities are stronger when we all pull together to solve our problems and restore our faith in each other, and by doing so in the promise of America. Our country is stronger when we work with our friends and allies to promote peace, prosperity, and security around the world.

This is an idea that goes back to the founding of America, when 13 separate colonies found a way -- despite their differences -- to join together as one nation. They knew they were not stronger on their own, and neither are we.

I've had the great delight of seeing the musical "Hamilton." And I hope more people at least get a chance to listen to the score and to hear the words. There's a great song by the character playing George Washington who sings, "History's eyes are on us.' That was true then, and that's true today.

If we do this right, and if we have the hard conversations we need to have, we will become stronger still -- like steel tempered by fire. Now don't get me wrong, fierce debates are part of who we are -- they started at my dinner table with my father, and have continued ever since. It is who we are. You're reminded of that when you read history, when you think about the Lincoln-Douglas Debates. Debate over the right way forward.

And sometimes we have to balance competing values like freedom and order, justice and security, these are complementary values of American life. That isn't easy. Previous generations have had to overcome terrible challenges. And no one more so than Abraham Lincoln. But in the end, if we do the work, we will cease to be divided. We, in fact, will be indivisible with liberty and justice for all.
And we will remain -- in Lincoln's words -- the last, best hope of earth.

Thank you all very much."

Thank you! That was so great.

Hello, New Hampshire! It is so great, it is so great to be here with so many friends, old and new. to be back with so many friends old and new.

Thank you! Thank you so much. I have to say it is such a great privilege to be here with Senator Sanders. Being here with him and New Hampshire, I can't help but reflect on how much more enjoyable this election is going to be now that we're on the same side. Because you know what? We are stronger together.

And I want to give a special thanks to someone who has been with Senator Sanders every step of the way, not just throughout this campaign but over the years, his wonderful wife, Jane Sanders.

And also I've had the pleasure of meeting his son, Levi Sanders! Thank you!

I also appreciate greatly having the opportunity for all of us to hear from the speakers beforehand, Governor Maggie Hassan, the next Senator from the state of New Hampshire!

Senator Jeanne Shaheen who is doing a tremendous job for you.

And we are delighted to have heard from and to have with us Bill McKibben and Jim Dean.

Over these last few weeks, Bernie and I have worked together on plans to put college within reach for more people, and to ensure that everyone in America has access to quality, affordable health care. And now, with your help, we are joining forces to defeat Donald Trump, win in November, and yes, together build a future we can all believe in.

Just as Bernie said, over the years, I've gotten to know him as a colleague and a friend. His reputation for passionate advocacy hasn't always made him the most popular person in Washington. But you know what? That's generally a sign you're doing something right.

Throughout this campaign Senator Sanders has brought people off the sidelines and into the political process. He has energized and inspired a generation of young people who care deeply about our country, and are building a movement that is bigger than one candidate or one campaign.

So thank you, thank you Bernie -- for your endorsement, but more than that, thank you for your lifetime of fighting injustice. I am proud to be fighting alongside you because my friends, this is a time for all of us to stand together. These have been difficult times for America.

This is a time for all of us to stand together -- because these have been difficult days for our country.

Taking on the systemic racism that plagues our country -- and rebuilding the frayed bonds of trust and respect between law enforcement and the communities they serve -- will require contributions from all of us. And we have to begin by starting to listen to each other. And more than that, we then have to do something that will help us fix these problems.

We have to reform our broken criminal justice system, take back our democracy from the wealthy special interests, and make our economy work for everyone, not just those at the top. And you know what? We have to do all these things at the same time.

That's why throughout this campaign, we've been calling for eliminating racial profiling and disparities in sentencing. Ending the era of mass incarceration, dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline, providing more employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated people.

In addition to that, I am proposing two new steps that get law enforcement the support they need while also stopping the tragedy, the tragedy of black men and women -- and black children -- being killed in police incidents.

First, let's bring law enforcement and the communities they swear to protect and serve together to develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers.

And second, let's provide better training on implicit bias, that remains a problem even in our best police departments but it also remains a problem across our society.

I'm asking for all of us to really search our hearts and minds to make sure that we don't have those implicit biases. Let's learn from police departments like Dallas that had made strong progress, and apply their lessons nationwide. Because everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law.

Remember, when gunfire broke out in Dallas, the peaceful protestors and the crowds that had gathered to support them ran to safety, while the police officers -- who just minutes before had been talking with and taking pictures with and protecting the protesters -- the police officers ran the other way -- they ran into the gunfire. That's the kind of courage and dedication our police and first responders show every single day.

So yes -- let's take real, meaningful action to end the epidemic of gun violence in America. From Sandy Hook to Orlando to Dallas, and so many other places, these tragedies tear at our soul. And so do the incidents that don't even dominate the headlines. Just this past Sunday, a young man, Seth Rich, who worked for the Democratic National Committee to expand voting rights, was shot and killed in his neighborhood in Washington. He was just 27 years old.

Surely we can agree that weapons of war have no place on the streets of America. Our police and first responders should never have to face a madman, a racist, a person filled with hatred, with an assault weapon. We owe it to every officer who puts his or her life on the line to protect us -- so let's protect them.

And we can't stop there. This is part of a broader challenge across our country. Inequality is too high, wages are too low, and it is just too hard to get ahead for too many Americans.

We need an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. Not just the millionaires and billionaires but everybody.

And to do that, we need to go big and we need to go bold. This isn't a time for half measures. So we are setting five ambitious goals.

For starters, in my first 100 days as President, we will make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II.

More jobs here in New Hampshire and across our country, especially in places that have been left out and left behind. In communities of color. In coal country. Indian Country. Everywhere where a person deserves the same shot at the American Dream as anybody else in our country.

And when I say good-paying jobs, I mean it. As Bernie said, Donald Trump thinks wages are too high. He actually stood on a debate stage and said so. He does want to get rid of the federal minimum wage altogether.

Well, both Senator Sanders and I believe anyone who is willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family. And Bernie is right -- $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage. So sorry Donald, if you're watching, we're not cutting the minimum wage -- we're raising the minimum wage.

We're going to create millions of good jobs by making America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. As Bernie reminds us so powerfully, we owe it to future generations to work together to combat climate change. And we're going to do it. We've got the intelligence. We've got the innovation. We're going to roll up our sleeves and demonstrate to the world what America is made of. We're going to have that clean energy economy. We're going to make it work for everybody.

And make no mistake -- we will defend American jobs and American workers by saying "no" to the assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively. And we're going to say "no" to attacks on working families and "no" to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Second, we're going to make college debt-free for all and help millions of people struggling with existing student debt save thousands of dollars.

Here in New Hampshire, students are carrying one of the highest debt loads in the country. I've heard from young people who can't start a business, move out of their parents' home, or even get married because of all the student debt holding them back.

So with your help, we're going to make it so future students won't have to borrow a dime to attend public colleges or universities. Thanks to the new proposal Senator Sanders and I worked on together, for families making less than $125,000 a year, we will eliminate tuition at those schools altogether. And we will do more to help students cover all the costs of getting an education -- including books, supplies, and living expenses.

Because in the words of a student I met here in New Hampshire, "paying for college shouldn't be the hardest thing about going to college."

Third, we're going to rewrite the rules, and crack down on companies that ship jobs and profits overseas. Let's reward the companies that share profits with their employees instead.

And we will defend and strengthen the tough reforms President Obama put in place on the financial industry -- not let Donald Trump tear them up. Because we do, we do need to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again.

Number four, we're going to make sure Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes. When people say the game is rigged, the best evidence is our tax code. It is riddled with scams, loopholes, and special breaks. It is wrong that some millionaires do pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries, and we're going to stop it.

Now compare what Senator Sanders and I intend to do with Donald Trump's tax plan. His tax plan would make our current system even worse. Independent analysts say he would add $30 trillion to the national debt in order to give a massive gift to the wealthiest Americans, Wall Street money managers, and our largest corporations. But after all, what else should we expect from someone who calls himself "the King of Debt"?

Now we have been pointing out the problems with his tax plan for months. And I think Donald is starting to feel the pressure.

In fact, even as we speak, he's apparently bringing in the biggest names in trickle-down, supply-side economics to help him figure out what to do -- now these are the same advisors who brought us 30 years of a disastrous Republican philosophy that gave the huge breaks to those at the top.

Now you don't have to be psychic to know what's going to happen next: they're going to come back with another plan with maybe some bells and whistles, Bernie, that tries to disguise the fact that they still are slashing taxes for the wealthy, large corporations, and Donald Trump himself. And they'll try to use voodoo economics to tell us all the ways it will actually help the economy.

But they're not fooling anybody, at least I hope they're not. Just like his current plan -- which he calls "inspiring," "tremendous," and "amazing" -- you know, he uses a lot of adjectives to avoid telling you any specifics. Here's what we know for sure: whatever he comes out with next is going to give huge tax cuts to the corporations and the rich at the expense of the middle class.

Now there's that old saying, you've heard it, I used to hear it a lot in Arkansas, you can put lipstick on a pig -- but it's still a pig.

And I've got to tell you, the first time that the Republicans pulled the voodoo economics, you know, they fooled us. Shame on them. But if they come back with the same argument and people fall for it, shame on us. But I will promise you this, Senator Sanders and I will spare no effort to make sure the people of America know that once again Trump and his cronies are trying to pull the wool over our eyes and come back with the same failed policies that hurt us before.

We're not going to let them get away with it again.

And finally, our fifth goal is we're going to step up and respond to the way American families actually live and work in the 21st century. Our families and our workplaces have changed, so isn't it time for our policies to change too?

Let's expand Social Security to match today's realities, not cut or privatize it.

Let's join the rest of the developed world and offer paid family leave.

And finally, let's guarantee equal pay for women once and for all.

I can just envision the tweets Donald is putting together. And Donald Trump can accuse me of playing "the woman card" all he wants. If fighting for equal pay and paid family leave is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

And I'll tell you, these aren't just my fights. These are Bernie's fights. These are America's fights. And I feel with all my being, these are fights we have to wage and win together.

As Bernie and his supporters have argued so eloquently, we won't get anywhere unless we overhaul our campaign finance system.

It is past time to end the stranglehold of wealthy special interests in Washington, and get back to government of the people, by the people, and for the people.

That's why as president from my very first days, I'll make campaign finance reform a top priority. We will do everything we can to overturn Citizens United. And we will require everybody -- Democrats, Republicans, and Independents, whoever -- to disclose their donors.

And while we're at it, we are going to create a small-donor matching system to make it easy for more Americans to be elected at every level of government. Because just like Bernie, I've met so many people here in New Hampshire with great ideas for our country. I want to see you run for office and win.

And here's another radical idea: Let's make it easier to vote, not harder. Let's fight back against attacks on voting rights across the country -- attacks that disproportionately affect low-income voters, people of color, students, the elderly, and women.

That means we need to restore the Voting Rights Act and then keep going. All Americans should be automatically registered to vote on their 18th birthday. Every state should have at least 20 days of in-person voting. And no one in America should ever have to wait more than 30 minutes to cast their ballot.

So Senator Sanders and I will be working to get unaccountable money out of politics and the voices of everyday Americans back in.

Because as Bernie has said: This isn't a progressive issue. It's not a conservative issue. It's an American issue.

And let me close with this: To everyone here and everyone across the country who poured your heart and soul into Senator Sanders' campaign, thank you. Thank you. I was proud of the campaign we ran, it was a campaign about issues not insults. And our country desperately needs your voices and involvement and so does this campaign and so does the Democratic Party. Because you know what? we need to take back the Senate and take back the House and make sure we have Democratic governors and Democratic state legislators. Let's open the doors to everyone who shares our progressive values.

This is one of the most important elections in our lifetimes. So I'm asking you to stand with us. And then, I'm asking you to keep working with me in the weeks, months, and, yes, years ahead. You will always have a seat at the table when I'm in the White House.

As Bernie will tell you, talk is cheap. We need to keep fighting to make sure everything we've stood for is real in the lives of people across America.

This amazing country of ours is worthy of our best efforts. This election, let's send a clear message: In America, we don't tear each other down -- we lift each other up. We build bridges, not walls. We put common interest ahead of self-interest. We stand together because we're stronger together.

So I need your help. Please join this campaign. Make it your own. You can take out your phone right now and text JOIN, J-O-I-N, to 47246. Or go to hillaryclinton.com. We accept $27 donations, too, you know.

I can't tell you how grateful I am to be standing here with Senator Sanders. Because I think both of us realize that each of our campaigns together represent the best of who we are. And now it is time for us to take that message to the rest of the country. I am fully aware that the other side will do everything possible to distort, to misinform, and we can't let that happen. We have to be standing up and fighting for the America that we know we can create together. I am confident and optimistic about our future, particularly when it comes to young people. I think America's best years are still ahead of us. So join with us. Let's make this happen together and win the election!

Thank you very much!

Giving all praise and honor to God.

Thank you for that welcome, and for letting me be a part of this anniversary celebration for the AME Church. I want to thank Bishop Green as well as Bishop Bryant, Bishop White, Bishop Ingram, Bishop Young, Bishop McKenzie, Bishop Jackson, Dr. Richard Allen Lewis, Sr., Reverend Dr. Jeffery B. Cooper, Sr., Bishop Snorton, Reverend Vincent and the AME General Conference Choir, which I had the great pleasure of hearing from backstage.

There is no better place to mark this milestone for the AME Church than right here in Philadelphia, the city where this church was founded by a former slave 200 years ago.

Today, we join to celebrate your esteemed history, the leaders and congregants who built this community and kept it strong, and your legacy of service. You seek to meet what the Book of Micah tells us are the Lord's requirements for each of us: "To do justice, love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God."

As President Obama has said, the church is the "beating heart" of the African American community. This is the place where people worship, study, grieve and rejoice without fear of persecution or mistreatment. That is a precious thing, my friends, in this world. I know that, from my experience as a lifelong Methodist, how important my own church community has been to me.

So I come here today, first and foremost, to say thank you. Thank you for being part of this historic institution, and for carrying its work forward, as Bishop Green said. I also come tonight as a mother, and a grandmother to two beautiful little children. And like so many parents and grandparents across America, I have been following the news of the past few days with horror and grief.

On Tuesday, Alton Sterling, father of five, was killed in Baton Rouge approached by the police for selling CDs outside a convenience store. On Wednesday, Philando Castile, 32 years old, was killed outside St. Paul pulled over by the police for a broken tail light. And last night in Dallas, during a peaceful protest related to those killings, there was a vicious, appalling attack. A sniper targeted police officers. He said he wanted to hurt white people. Twelve officers were shot, along with two civilians. Five five officers have died. We now know all their names: Brent Thompson, Michael Krol, Michael Smith, Lorne Ahrens, and Patrick Zamarripa. And as I was on my way here today, we heard reports of another shooting yesterday morning in Tennessee.

What can one say about events like these? What can people and leaders of faith say about events like these? It's hard, isn't it, even to know where to start. But let's start here let's take a moment to pray for all the families and the loved ones suffering today. For Alton's grieving children. For the four-year-old girl who bravely comforted her mother while Philando died in front of them. For the families of those police officers who lived every day with the fear that something like this could happen, and will always be proud of their service and sacrifice.

We pray for those families, and for the souls of everyone we lost this week and in all weeks preceding. May they rest in God's peace.

Now, there are many unanswered questions about each of these incidents. We will learn more in the days ahead. And when we know as much as we can, there must be a just accounting.

For now, let's focus on what we already know deep in our hearts. We know there is something wrong with our country. There is too much violence, too much hate, too much senseless killing, too many people dead who shouldn't be. And we know there is clear evidence that African Americans are much more likely to be killed in police incidents than any other group of Americans.

And we know there is too little trust in too many places between police and the communities they are sworn to protect. With so little common ground, it can feel impossible to have the conversations we need to have, to begin fixing what's broken. We owe our children better than this. We owe ourselves better than this.

No one has all the answers. We need to find them together. Indeed, that is the only way we can find them. Those are the truest things I can offer today. We must do better, together. Let's begin with something simple but vital: listening to each other. For Scripture tells us to "incline our ears to wisdom and apply our hearts to understanding."

The deaths of Alton and Philando are the latest in a long and painful litany of African Americans killed in police incidents 123 so far this year alone. We know the names of other victims, too:

Tamir Rice.

Sandra Bland.

Walter Scott.

Dontre Hamilton.

Laquan McDonald.

Eric Garner.

Michael Brown.

Freddie Gray.

Brandon Tate-Brown, whose mother Tanya is here today, and who was killed not far from here a year and a half ago.

Tragically, we could go on and on, couldn't we. The families of the lost are trying to tell us. We need to listen. People are crying out for criminal justice reform. Families are being torn apart by excessive incarceration. Young people are being threatened and humiliated by racial profiling. Children are growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty.

They're trying to tell us. We need to listen.

Brave police officers are working hard every day to inspire trust and confidence. As we mourn the Dallas police officers who died and pray for those wounded, let's not forget how the Dallas Police Department in particular has earned a reputation for excellence. They've worked hard for years to improve policing and strengthen their bonds with the community. And they've gotten results.

Police officers across the country are pouring their hearts into this work, because they know how vital it is to the peace, tranquility, justice, and equality of America. They're trying to tell us. And we need to listen.

People are crying out for relief from gun violence. We remember Reverend Clementa Pinckney, eight congregants at Mother Emanuel in Charleston and thousands more killed every year by guns across our nation. Things have become so broken in Washington that to just try to get a vote on compromise gun safety reforms, John Lewis himself had to stage a sit-in on the floor of the House of Representatives.

Gun violence is ripping apart people's lives. They're trying to tell us. And we need to listen.

I know that, just by saying all these things together, I may upset some people. I'm talking about criminal justice reform the day after a horrific attack on police officers. I'm talking about courageous, honorable police officers just a few days after officer-involved killings in Louisiana and Minnesota. I'm bringing up guns in a country where merely talking about comprehensive background checks and getting assault weapons off our streets gets you demonized.

But all these things can be true at once. We do need police and criminal justice reforms, to save lives and make sure all Americans are treated equally in rights and dignity. We do need to support police departments and stand up for the men and women who put their lives on the line every day to protect us. And we do need to reduce gun violence. We may disagree about how to do all these things, but surely we can all agree with those basic premises. Surely this week showed us how true they are.

Now, I have set forth plans for over a year to reduce excessive violence, reform our sentencing laws, support police departments that are doing things right, make it harder for the wrong people to get their hands on guns. For example, there are two important steps that I will take as president.

First, I will bring law enforcement and communities together to develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers. We will make it clear for everyone to see when deadly force is warranted, and when it isn't. And we will emphasize proven methods for de-escalating situations before they reach that point.

And second, let's be honest let's acknowledge that implicit bias still exists across our society and even in the best police departments. We have to tackle it together, which is why in my first budget, I will commit $1 billion to find and fund the best training programs, support new research, and make this a national policing priority. Let's learn from those police departments like Dallas that have been making progress, apply their lessons nationwide.

Now, plans like these are important. But we have to acknowledge that on their own they won't be enough. On their own, our thoughts and prayers aren't enough, either. We need to do some hard work inside ourselves, too.

Today, there are people all across America sick over what happened in Dallas, and fearful that the murders of these police officers will mean that vital questions raised by Alton's and Philando's deaths will go unanswered. That is a reasonable fear. Today, there are people all across America who watched what happened in Dallas last night and are thinking, no frustration with the police could ever justify this bloodshed. How did we get here? And is there more to come? That's a reasonable fear, too..

It is up to all of us to make sure those fears don't come true. We cannot, we must not vilify police officers. Remember what those officers were doing when they died. They were protecting a peaceful march. They were people in authority, making sure their fellow citizens had the right to protest authority. And there is nothing more vital to our democracy than that. And they died for it.

Ending the systemic racism that plagues our country and rebuilding our communities where the police and citizens all see themselves as being on the same side will require contributions from all of us. White Americans need to do a better job of listening when African Americans talk-- talk about the seen and unseen barriers you face every day. We need to try, as best we can, to walk in one another's shoes to imagine what it would be like if people followed us around stores, or locked their car doors when we walked past. Or if every time our children went to play in the park, or went for a ride, or just to the store to buy iced tea and Skittles, we said a prayer "Please, God please, God don't let anything happen to my baby."

And let's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers, kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to a dangerous job we need them to do. When gunfire broke out yesterday night, and everyone ran to safety, the police officers ran the other way into the gunfire. That's the kind of courage our police and first responders show every single day somewhere across America. And let's remember let's think about what Dallas Police Chief David Brown said this morning. He said, "Please join me in applauding these brave men and women, who do this job under great scrutiny, under great vulnerability, who literally risk their lives to protect our democracy." He went on to say, "We don't feel much support most days. Let's not make today most days."

Let's remember that not just today but every day.

Let's ask ourselves, what can I do? What can I personally do to stop violence and promote justice? How can I show that your life matters to me? That I have a stake in your safety and wellbeing?

Elie Wiesel, who died last week, once clarified for us that "the opposite of love is not hate it's indifference. And the opposite of life is not death it's indifference." None of us can afford to be indifferent toward each other not now, not ever. And I'm going to keep talking about these issues with every audience. And if I'm elected, I'll start working on this on day one and keep at it every single day after that.

I want you to know the 24-hour news cycle moves on I won't. This is so important to who we are, what kind of nation we are making for our children and our grandchildren. As President Obama said yesterday, and as we all know in our hearts to be true: We are better than this. And if we push hard enough, and long enough, we can bend the arc of history toward justice. We can avoid that choice that Dr. King posed for us between chaos and community.

So yes, this is about our country. It's also about our kids. There's nothing more important than that. And I think it's about our faith. We have a lot of work to do. We don't have a moment to lose. But I would not be here tonight if I did not believe we can come together with a sense of shared purpose and belief in our shared humanity, and if I did not know we must, because truly we are stronger together. Not separated into factions or sides; not shouting over each other about who matters more or who has more cause to be upset; but together, facing these challenges together. And if we do this right and have the hard conversations we need to have, we will become even stronger like steel tempered by fire.

Fierce debates are part of who we are just like freedom and order, justice and security complementary values of American life. They are not easy. They challenge us to dig deep, and constantly seek the right balance. But in the end, if we do that work, we will become a better nation. If we stand with each other now, we can build a future where no one is left out or left behind, and everyone can share in the promise of America which is big enough for everyone, not to be reserved for a few.

But we know something we know that work is hard, don't we? I'm calling on this historic church, and all of our churches, to think hard about what special role you can play. Every day, you teach and show us about the Golden Rule and so much else. Why can't we really believe in and act on it? To treat others as we would want to be treated.

In the 13th chapter of First Corinthians, St. Paul extols the virtues of faith, hope, and love for our fellow human beings. He says we need them all in this life, because of our imperfections: we "see through a glass darkly" and only "know in part." He proclaims love the greatest virtue, necessary to keep faith and hope alive and to give us direction.

I've tried to say for some time now that our country needs more love and kindness. I know it's not the kind of thing presidential candidates usually say. But we have to find ways to repair these wounds and close these divides. The great genius and salvation of the United States is our capacity to do and to be better. And we must answer the call to do that again. It's critical to everything else we want to achieve more jobs with rising income; good education no matter what ZIP code a child lives in; affordable college; paying back debts; health care for everyone. We must never give up on the dream of this nation.

I want to close with a favorite passage a passage that you all know that means a great deal to me and I'm sure to many of you, from Galatians. "Let us not grow weary in doing good" "for in due season, we shall reap, if we do not lose heart."

My friends, let us not grow weary. Let us plan the path forward for all of God's children. There are lost lives to redeem, bright futures to claim. Let us go forth go forward, Bishop with a sense of heartfelt love and commitment. And may the memory of those we've lost light our way toward the future our children and grandchildren deserve.

Thank you, AME, and God bless you.
Thank you so much. Hello Charlotte. It's great to be back in North Carolina with so many friends:

With Congresswoman Alma Adams, and Congressman David Price, and Congressman G.K. Butterfield.

And your next U.S. Senator, Deborah Ross.

And your next Governor, Roy Cooper.

And of course, with our president, Barack Obama.

I feel very privileged because I've known the President in many roles. As a colleague in the Senate. As an opponent in a hard-fought primary. And as the President I was so proud to serve as Secretary of State. But I've also known him as the friend that I was honored to stand with in good times and hard times. Someone who has never forgotten where he came from. And Donald, if you're out there tweeting, it's Hawaii.

Over the years, we've had some memorable experiences together -- like storming a secret meeting of foreign leaders at a global climate summit. That was fun. You should have seen the Chinese guards try to stop us. Now, they put their arms out and the President just went right through. Then they put their arms out, and I went right under. And the President, with that amazing smile of his, said, "Hey, we've been looking for you."

Now through it all, as we went from rivals to partners to friends, my esteem for him just kept growing. So did my admiration for his brilliant wife, Michelle, and those two amazing daughters that they have raised. My husband and I know how hard it is to raise a child in the public eye, in the fishbowl of the White House. But the Obamas have done a fabulous job. Malia -- who just graduated from high school and celebrated her 18th birthday yesterday -- and Sasha who has the energy and enthusiasm of a wonderful young woman. Now I happen to think those two young woman might be the most impressive accomplishment of all for our President.

Now it means so much to have the President's support in this campaign. After all, he knows a thing or two about winning elections -- take it from me.

And he also knows that despite all the progress we've made under his leadership, and yes we have, we still have a lot of work to do.

President Obama's job, one that he did not ask for but was handed to him, was to save us from a second Great Depression -- and that is exactly what he did. Actually, I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for saving our economy.

We've added 14 million private-sector jobs. The auto industry just had its best year ever. 20 million people now have health care. Clean energy production has soared. I could go on and on, but you get the idea. That's what leadership looks like.

Our next president has a different job to do -- building on the progress that President Obama has made. We have to continue to take on deep structural challenges that existed long before the crisis. We can see it here in North Carolina and across the country: inequality is too high, wages are too low, and it's just too hard to get ahead.

We need an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.

So we're setting five big, ambitious goals.

First, under President Obama and Vice President Biden, we've had 75 straight months of job growth. I want us to see 75 more. So in my first 100 days as President, we'll make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II.

And when I say good-paying jobs, I mean exactly that. Donald Trump thinks wages are too high. He actually stood on the debate stage and said that. He wants to get rid of the federal minimum wage altogether.

Well, I think anyone who is willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to raise a family. So we're going to increase the federal minimum wage, and give the middle class a raise. That's good for our families, good for our economy, and boy is it good for our country.

Second, we're going to make college debt-free for all. And we're going to build on the President's idea to make community college free. And we're going to help millions of people struggling with existing student debt save thousands of dollars.

Third, we're going to rewrite the rules, and crack down on companies that ship jobs overseas and profits to go with them. Let's reward the companies that share profits with their employees instead.

And we're going to defend and strengthen the tough reforms President Obama put in place on the financial industry -- not tear them up like Donald Trump says he'll do. We need to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street ever again.

Fourth, we're going to make sure that Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes. It is just plain wrong that a millionaire can pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries, and we're going to stop it. And oh, by the way, we're going to keep asking to see Donald Trump's tax returns.

And finally, we're going to step up and respond to the way American families actually live and work in the 21st century. Our families, our workplaces have changed, so isn't it time for our policies to change?

Donald Trump can accuse me of playing "the woman card" all he wants, but if fighting for equal pay and affordable childcare and paid family leave is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

Most of all, most of all-- most of all though, we're going to build on the vision for America that President Obama has always championed -- a vision for a future where we do great things together, not as red states and blue states but as the United States.

When I look at President Obama, I see a leader with heart, depth, and humility. Someone who, in spite of the obstruction he's faced, still reaches for common ground and common purpose.

Some of you might remember, that he and I competed against each other as hard as we could back in 2008. But when it was over, I was proud to endorse him and campaign for him.

And I'll never forget when he called me the Sunday after the election, asking me to come to Chicago. It turned out he wanted me to be Secretary of State, and I don't think anybody saw that coming -- especially me.

And as I travelled on behalf of our country, a lot of people around the world asked how President Obama and I could work so well together after being such fierce competitors. In some places, the person who loses an election gets exiled or executed, not asked to be Secretary of State.

But President Obama asked me to serve, and I accepted. You know why? We both love our country.

That is how democracy is supposed to work. We just celebrated 240 years of independence. In America, we put common interest before self-interest. We stand together because we know we're stronger together.

That's the kind of president Barack Obama has been. He's made difficult, even unpopular decisions for the good of our country. I have sat with him in the Situation Room and seen him make the hardest choices a president faces. He does it with steady, principled leadership.

He's a statesman, leading not just our country but the entire world. It was his vision, it was his vision and diplomacy that secured a historic global agreement on climate change, put a lid on Iran's nuclear program, opened up Cuba, and rallied the world to curb the spread of nuclear weapons. I saw him go toe-to-toe with the toughest foreign leaders, and to give the order to go after Osama bin Laden. This, my friends, is a president who knows how to keep us safe and strong.

Compare that to Donald Trump. Can you imagine him sitting in the Oval Office the next time America faces a crisis? The world hangs on every word our President says, and Donald Trump is simply unqualified and temperamentally unfit to be our President and Commander-in-Chief.

So here in North Carolina this election is our chance to say, "Our country is better than this." In America, we don't tear each other down, we lift each other up. We build bridges, not walls. We don't call the country we love a disaster or a laughing stock -- we know America already is the greatest country on earth.

Just think about those early patriots who met in Philadelphia that hot summer of 1776. They knew we would all rise or fall together.

Nobody who looked like Barack Obama -- or me -- would have been included back then. But we're here today because the story of America is the story of hard-fought, hard-won progress. So, I want you to remember that for 240 years, our history has moved in that direction -- slowly at times, but unmistakably. As the President has reminded us, the arc of the moral universe is long but it bends toward justice.

So if you believe, along with me and the President, that our best days as a nation are still ahead of us, please, join us in this campaign. Take out your phone right now. Take out your phone and text JOIN to 47246. Or go to hillaryclinton.com. We are hiring organizers right here in North Carolina.

We're going to fight for every vote in this state, and with your help, we're going to win it. So, I don't know about you but we are fired up and ready to go. Ready to win this election.

Please join me in welcoming the President of the United States, Barack Obama.

Thank you all! Tonight caps an amazing journey. A really, really long journey.

It's wonderful to be back in Brooklyn, here in this beautiful building. It may be hard to see, but we're all standing under a glass ceiling right now-- don't worry, we're not smashing this one.

Thanks to you, we've reached a milestone-- the first time in our history that a woman will be a major party's nominee for President of the United States.

Tonight's victory is not about one person. It belongs to generations of women and men who struggled and sacrificed and made this moment possible.

Tonight belongs to all of you.

I want to thank all the volunteers, community leaders, activists, and organizers who supported our campaign in every state and territory. Thank you for talking to your neighbors and for making contributions to hillaryclinton.com. Your efforts have produced a strong majority of the popular vote, victories in a majority of the contests, and after tonight, a majority of pledged delegates.

I also want to thank all the people across this country who've taken the time to talk with me. I've learned a lot from you about the persistent problems and the unfinished promise of America. So many of you feel like you're out there on your own, and no one has your backs. Well, I do. I hear you, I see you, and if I'm fortunate enough to serve as your president, I'll always have your back.

I want to congratulate Senator Sanders for the extraordinary campaign he has run. He's spent his career fighting for progressive causes and principles, and he's excited millions of voters, especially young people. Let there be no mistake: Senator Sanders, his campaign, and the vigorous debate we've had about how to raise incomes, reduce inequality, and increase upward mobility have been very good for the Democratic Party and for America.

This has been a hard-fought, deeply-felt campaign. But whether you supported me, or Senator Sanders, or one of the Republicans, we all need to keep working toward a better, fairer, stronger America.

It never feels good to put your heart into a cause or a candidate you believe in-- and to come up short.

I know that feeling well.

But, as we look ahead to the battle that awaits, let's remember all that unites us.

We all want an economy with more opportunity and less inequality, where Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again. We all want a government that listens to the people, not the power brokers, which means getting unaccountable money out of politics. And we all want a society that is tolerant, inclusive, and fair.

We all believe that America succeeds when more people share in our prosperity. When more people have a voice in our political system. When more people can contribute to our communities.

We believe that cooperation is better than conflict, unity is better than division, empowerment is better than resentment, and bridges are better than walls.

It's a simple but powerful idea. We believe we are stronger together.

The stakes in this election are high. And the choice is clear.

Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be president and Commander-in-Chief. And he's not just trying to build a wall between America and Mexico-- he's trying to wall off Americans from each other.

When he says, "Let's make America great again," that's code for "let's take America backward."

Back to a time when opportunity and dignity were reserved for some, not all. Promising his supporters an economy he can't recreate.

We want to write the next chapter in American greatness, with a 21st-century prosperity that lifts everyone who's been left out and left behind, including those who may not vote for us but who deserve their chance to make a new beginning.

When Donald Trump says a distinguished judge born in Indiana can't do his job because of his Mexican heritage, or mocks a reporter with disabilities, or calls women "pigs," it goes against everything we stand for. We want an America where everyone is treated with respect and their work is valued.

Donald Trump doesn't believe we are stronger together. He has abused his primary opponents and their families, attacked the press for asking tough questions, and denigrated Muslims and immigrants. He wants to win by stoking fear and rubbing salt in wounds. And reminding us daily just how great he is.

We believe we should lift each other up, not tear each other down.

We need to give America a raise-- not complain that hard-working people's wages are too high.

We need to help young people struggling with student debt-- not pile more on to our national debt with giveaways to the super-wealthy.

We need to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century, not insist that climate change is a hoax.

To be great, we can't be small. We have to be as big as the values that define America.

And we are a big-hearted, fair-minded country. We teach our children that this is one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way. For all. Indivisible.

This election isn't about the same old fights between Democrats and Republicans. This election is different. It's about who we are as a nation. It's about millions of Americans coming together to say: We are better than this. We won't let this happen in America.

If you agree-- whether you're a Democrat, Republican or independent-- I hope you'll join us.

In just a few weeks, we'll meet in Philadelphia, which gave birth to our nation in that hot summer of 1776. Those early patriots knew they'd all rise or fall together. Today, that's more true than ever.

Our campaign will take this message to every corner of the country.

We're stronger when our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top, with good-paying jobs and good schools in every zip code, and a real commitment to all families and all regions of our country.

We're stronger when we work with our allies around the world to keep us safe.

We're stronger when we respect each other, listen to each other, and act with a sense of common purpose.

We're stronger when every family in every community knows they're not on their own, because we're all in this together. It really does "take a village"-- to raise a child and to build a stronger future for us all.

I learned this a long time ago, from the biggest influence in my life: my mother.

She was my rock, from the day I was born till the day she left us. She overcame a childhood marked by abandonment and mistreatment, and somehow managed not to become bitter or broken. Mom believed that life is about serving others. And she taught me never to back down from a bully, which it turns out was pretty good advice.

This past Saturday would have been her 97th birthday. She was born on June 4, 1919. Some of you may know that date. On the very day Mom was being born in Chicago, Congress was passing the 19th Amendment to the Constitution, giving women the right to vote.

I wish Mom could be here tonight. I wish she could see what a wonderful mother Chelsea has become. I wish she could meet our beautiful granddaughter Charlotte.

And I wish she could see her daughter become the Democratic Party's nominee for president of the United States.

Yes, there are still ceilings to break-- for women and men, for all Americans. But don't let anyone tell you that great things can't happen in America. Barriers can come down. Justice and equality can win. Our history has moved in that direction-- slowly at times, but unmistakably-- thanks to generations of Americans who refused to give up or back down.

You are writing a new chapter of that story. This campaign is about making sure there are no ceiling -- no limits-- on any of us.

And this is our moment to come together.

Go to hillaryclinton.com and contribute what you can. Text JOIN to 47246 and help us organize in all 50 states. Every phone call you make and every door you knock will help move us forward.

I'm going to take a moment later tonight to sit and fully absorb the history we've made here. But what I care about most is the history our country has yet to write. Our children and grandchildren will look back at this time, at the choices we're about to make, the goals we will strive for, the principles we will live by. We need to make sure they can be proud of us.

The end of the primaries is only the beginning of the work we're called to do.

If we stand together, we'll grow together, and rise together.

Because we're stronger together.

Thank you all. May God bless you and may God bless America.

Hillary Clinton delivered the following remarks in Raleigh, North Carolina.

Thank you, It's great to be back in Raleigh! Thank you so much. I have to confess I was having such a good time backstage listening to the 120 Minutes Band, listening to Mary Wingate do the national anthem and just being absolutely transported by Shay Taylor and Friends, the gospel group that got us all going today. And I cannot thank a better twosome than the people you just saw up here.

Because I honestly believe Jim Hunt is not only one of the best governors North Carolina has ever had, but one of the best governors ever in America in the last years. And what he did to really put North Carolina on a path to the future has stood the test of time. We've had a few glitches with others who don't seem to understand what the ingredients are for building an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. But Jim Hunt knows that.

I look forward to continuing to work with him. And I was so delighted to have a chance, as I did, to have Alicia Wilkerson talk about her journey, how hard she has worked, raising her children, getting an education, making it possible for her to have a better future.

I so greatly appreciate her mentioning the SCHIP program which has helped 8 million kids every year get health insurance. Now because we are in North Carolina and we have a lot of friends here I want to acknowledge some of them. Your Secretary of State Elaine Marshall.

Senator Dan Blue, the Minority Leader of the North Carolina Senate. Representative Larry Hall, the Democratic leader of the North Carolina House of Representatives. Linda Coleman running for Lieutenant Governor. Judge Mike Morgan running against a Republican Supreme Court incumbent. And don't forget than Dan Blue III is running for State Treasurer. Josh Stein, running for Attorney General. And let's give a big round of applause to your next governor, Attorney General Roy Cooper! Your next AG commissioner Walter Smith and your next United States Senator, Debra Ross. We're going to work hard in the this election to elect as many Democrats up and down the ticket so that North Carolina can get back on the path to the path to the future, get off this detour that you've been on.

I have to start by saying if you notice anything different about me today, it could be that now I have double the "grandmother glow." This past weekend, Chelsea and Marc had a little boy and we're all totally over the moon about it.

Obviously, our family will do everything we can to make sure little Charlotte and now little Aidan grow up with every possible opportunity. I know that's what every parent and grandparent, aunt or uncle, godmother and godfather, people who care about the children in our lives, that's exactly how we all feel.

I believe with all my heart that you should not have to be the grandchild of a former president or secretary of state to have every opportunity available to you in this country.

Every single child deserves the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential and that has been the cause of my life.

It's rooted in the values I learned from my family and my faith. We're all in this together. And we have a responsibility to lift each other up.

As we Methodists say: Do all the good you can to all the people you can in all the ways you can. And that is absolutely true for our children.

That's why I got into public service in the first place. And it's why I'm determined that we will win this election.

I think it's an understatement to say that Americans face a choice in November.

As I said yesterday in Ohio, Donald Trump offers no real solutions for the economic challenges we face--he just continues to spout reckless ideas that will run up our debt and cause another economic crash.

I'm here today to offer an alternative. I have a clear vision for the economy, and it's this: We need to make sure our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.

Not just for the rich or the well-connected, not just for people living in some parts of the country, or people from certain backgrounds and not others--I mean everyone.

I have a plan to get us there: Five steps we can take together to drive growth that's strong, fair, and lasting. Growth that reduces inequality, increases upward mobility; that reaches into every corner of our country.

The measure of our success will be how much incomes rise for hardworking families. How many children are lifted out of poverty. How many Americans can find good jobs that support a middle class life and not only that, jobs that provide a sense of dignity and pride. That's what it means to have an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. That's the mission, and I'm asking all of you to join me in it.

We have to overcome some big challenges. I will admit that.

First, too many of our representatives in Washington are in the grips of a failed economic theory called trickle-down economics. I do not question their sincerity, but it has been proven wrong again and again.

But there are still people in Congress who insist on cutting taxes for the wealthy instead of investing in our future.

They careen from one self-inflicted crisis to another--shutting down the government, threatening to default on our national debt, refusing to make the commonsense investments that used to have broad bipartisan support, like rebuilding our roads and our bridges, our tunnels, our highways and airports, or investing in better education from zero through high school and college.

I like to look at evidence: I plead to that. I think evidence is important when making decisions that affect other people's lives. If the evidence were there to support this ideology, I would have to acknowledge that, but we have seen the results. Twice now in the past 30 years a Republican president has caused an economic mess and a Democratic president has had to come in and clean it up.

And yes, too many special interests and too many lobbyists have stood in the way of progress while protecting the perks of the privileged few.

It's not just Washington.

Too many corporations have embraced policies that favor hedge funds and other big shareholders and top management at the expense of their workers, communities, and even their long-term value.

They're driven by Wall Street's obsession with short-term share prices and quarterly earnings.

A recent survey of corporate executives found that more than half when asked would hold off on making a successful long-term investment--maybe in their workers, or plant equipment, or research--if it meant missing a target in the next earnings report.

So corporations stash cash overseas or they send it to top shareholders in the form of stock buybacks or dividends, instead of raising wages or investing in research and development.

This pressure, this short-term pressure, leads to perverse incentives and outrageous behavior.

It is wrong to take taxpayer dollars with one hand and give out pink slips with the other hand. And no company should be moving their headquarters overseas, just to avoid paying their taxes here at home.

In addition, there have been big changes in how American families live, learn, and work, but our policies haven't kept up.

There are so many examples of this.

Over the past several decades, women have entered the workforce and boosted our economy, yet we are the only, the only developed country that doesn't provide paid family leave of any kind.

We're asking families to rely on an old system of supports in a new economic reality. No wonder so many are struggling.

The bottom line is that too many leaders in business and government have lost sight of our shared responsibility to each other and to our nation.

They let Wall Street take big risks with unregulated financial activities, they skew our tax code toward the wealthy, they failed to enforce our trade rules, they undermined workers' rights.

They have forgotten that we are all in this together and we are at our best when we recognize that. Excessive inequality such as we have today reduces economic growth. Markets work best when all the stakeholders share in the benefits.

The challenges we face are significant.

It is not easy to change Washington, or how corporations behave. It takes more than stern words or a flashy slogan--it takes a plan.

It takes experience and the ability to work with both parties to get results.

That means we need a president who knows what we're up against, has no illusions about what we need to do to move ahead, but can actually get it done. And that is what I am offering.

Because there is good news. The good news is that everywhere I go, smart, determined men and women are working hard to reverse these trends.

Mayors are pioneering innovative ways to work with the private sector to invest in their cities.

Entrepreneurs and small businesses are building and hiring in places that bigger companies have abandoned.

Unions are providing training programs that add value to the companies that employ their members.

Union pension funds are already investing in infrastructure projects that have supported more than 100,000 jobs here in our country.

So do not grow weary, there are great ideas out there. And we are going to be partners in a big, bold effort to increase economic growth and distribute it more fairly.

To build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. I believe the federal government should adopt five ambitious goals:

First, let's break through the dysfunction in Washington to make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II.

Second, let's make college debt-free for all. And transform the way we prepare Americans for the jobs of the future.

Third, let's rewrite the rules so more companies share profits with their employees, and fewer ship profits and jobs overseas.

Finally, let's make sure that Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes. And all of this depends upon putting our families first and matching our policies to how you actually live and work in the 21st century.

Briefly about these four points: Let's start with jobs.

Every American willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays enough to support a family. And I know we can do this because I've seen it in the past.

You know, I remember when I was growing up and America had come out from the upheaval of depression and world war. Our leaders worked together to invest in a new foundation for American power and prosperity.

Highways to connect up our entire nation. College and housing for returning veterans and their families. Unprecedented scientific research. And it worked--we built the greatest middle class the world has ever known.

Now, we have to get as ambitious again. There is nothing we can't do. Let's be just as ambitious to build our 21st century American economy to produce the same results for hard working Americans.

In my first 100 days as president, I will work with both parties to pass a comprehensive plan to create the next generation of good jobs. Now the heart of my plan will be the biggest investment in American infrastructure in decades, including establishing an infrastructure bank that will bring private sector dollars off the sidelines and put them to work here.

And I've talked with local leaders around America and I've seen the dire need for investment. In Tampa, for example, I saw how a smart, targeted highway investment near a major port can create thousands of good-paying jobs, support the local economy and unlock national commerce.

We can create millions of good-paying jobs while preparing America to compete and win in the global economy.

So let's set these big national goals. And I know how important it is to rebuild our roads, our bridges and our airports, but we have more work to do. Let's build better. And let's connect every household to broadband by the year 2020.

Let's build a cleaner, more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country. Let's fix failing water systems like the one that poisoned children in Flint, Michigan. Let's renovate our public schools so every child in every community has access to safe, high-tech classrooms, laboratories, and libraries.

Our 100 Days jobs package will also include transformational investments in key drivers of growth:

Advance manufacturing, so we can "make it in America" and compete and win in the global economy.

Making America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century, which will create millions of jobs and help protect our planet.

Recommitting to scientific research, which can create new whole industries, just like we did in the '90s, when we started mapping the human genome.

And small businesses, which should be the engine for creating new jobs across America, they need to be free of red tape and they need to have access to credit. We need to slash unnecessary regulations making it easier to get startup capital from community banks and credit unions. If you have an idea for a small business, we want you to get started.

Let's free entrepreneurs to do what they do best--innovate and grow and hire and make sure that the new service and caregiving jobs being created today are jobs that pay well, too. And that does mean raising the national minimum wage.

So many of these are so personal to us that they need to be respected and lifted up. And I know too that we've got work to do to stand with those who are fighting for raising the minimum wage. It's not always how we think about this, but I can tell you another engine for growth and job creation would be comprehensive immigration reform.

It will bring millions of workers into the formal economy so you don't have an unlevel playing field, so that workers who are competing for those jobs don't get undercut because employers go out and find undocumented workers to do those jobs for a lower wage. I really believe it's not just the right thing to do, but it will be great.

It will be smart for our economy. I want people to be able to compete. I don't want to have that disadvantage that exists in too many places, where people are being are being priced out of the jobs they've always done.

So we can work toward a full employment and full potential economy. That does mean we can't ignore people that are still stuck on the sidelines, or working part-time when what they really want is a full-time job. Or those trapped in long-term joblessness, whether they're veterans, workers with disabilities, people coming home from prison, or young people who tried to start their careers in the midst of the Great Recession. I particularly want young people to feel that they are going to get good jobs that will give them that ladder of opportunity that they deserve to have in America.

That's why I want to expand incentives like the New Markets Tax Credit, Empowerment Zones, and other ideas that bring business, government, and communities together to create good jobs in poor or remote areas. Places that have lost a factory or a mine where generations of families used to work. Anyone willing to work should get the help they need to qualify for and find that good job.

That means breaking down the barriers of systemic racism and discrimination that hold back --those barriers, they hold back African Americans, Latinos, Asian and Native Americans, and women from fully participating in our economy.

We need to reverse the long-term neglect that has dried up jobs and opportunity in communities of color, in poor communities. It's not by accident that the unemployment rate now among black Americans is twice as high as among whites. Back in the '90s, we were closing that gap, incomes were going up for everybody.

I think we're going to have to invest money to create jobs for young people because right now I'm worried that if young people don't get that first job when they are young, learn about work, understand the obligations as well as the promise of work, it will be even more difficult to get them into the workforce later on.

It is way past time for us to guarantee equal pay for women, which is still not the reality.

So, you see it is not enough to have an affirmative agenda, we have to knock down those barriers.

And by the way, as you've seen here in North Carolina discriminating against LGBT Americans is bad for business.

And make no mistake, we will defend American jobs and American workers by saying "no" to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which does not meet my high bar for creating good-paying jobs. "No" to assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively.

"No" to every attack on the dignity of working families.

We're going to make this economy work for everyone, and it's time we start building this from the ground up. For every home and every community all the way to Washington. Now, I know very well that if you don't have the skills for the jobs of tomorrow, it's going to be difficult. Education is still the pathway for greater opportunities for many Americans.

Let's start at the beginning with making quality, affordable child care and preschool available in every community in the next 10 years, so we get our littlest Americans off to the best start.

Jim Hunt was a pioneer in this. Why did he care so much about children zero to five, besides the fact that he cared about them? Because he knew there was a direct line to how the youngest children were treated, educated, and prepared for school, and what kind of jobs and economic competitiveness North Carolina would have. So we're going to start by having families be their child's first teachers, and we're going to give them the support they need to do that. And when it comes to primary and secondary education I pledged to you we're going to make sure all our kids have good teachers and good schools, no matter what ZIP code you live in.

You know, for many years, thanks to people and leaders like Jim Hunt, North Carolina was a leading state when it came to education. Now, unfortunately, thanks to your Governor McCrory and the legislature, the average teacher salary can barely support a family. It should not be a surprise that thousands have quit in recent years.

We should support our teachers, not scapegoat them.

And then let's make sure every student has options after high school. Whether it's a four-year degree, free community college, an apprenticeship, or other forms of higher education, we need to provide the skills and credentials that match the job openings of today and tomorrow.

That's why I'm proposing new tax credits to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeships that lets you earn while you learn. And I will to support the union apprenticeships and training programs already out there. Not every good job requires a four-year college degree. We need to dignify skills training. So many young people have the talent and the will to succeed--they just need a helping hand.

That's why I want us to come together to help our young people break free from the burden of student debt. I'm sure we all have stories. I've met so many who told me they can't start a business. They can't even move out of their parent's basement because of all the student debt holding them back.

Let's set the goal to make debt-free college available to everyone. So future students won't have to borrow a dime to pay for tuition at public college or university.

And let's liberate the millions of Americans who already have student debt by making it easier to refinance, just like a mortgage. Let's make it easier to have debt forgiven by doing national service, let's make it easier to repay what you owe as a portion of your income so you never have to pay more than you can afford.

I've set out a way to do this, and we'll be talking more about it as we go forward in this campaign.

My third goal is to rewrite the rules so more companies share profits with employees, and fewer ship profits and jobs overseas.

I know there are a lot of businesses thriving here in North Carolina and across our country who see employees as assets to invest in, not costs to cut. They're building companies, not stripping them. They're creating good jobs, not eliminating them.

But too many, too many businesses take the opposite view. I'm not asking corporations to be more charitable, although I think that is important. I'm asking corporations to realize that when more Americans prosper, they prosper too, right? When your paycheck grows, America grows.

We are a 70 percent consumption economy. If we want higher growth, we have to raise incomes. So people have more disposable dollars to be able to spend, instead of holding back out of fear of what will happen.

So let's bring a long-term view back to board rooms and executive suites. Let's restore the link between productivity growth and wage growth.

As president, I will make it a national priority for more companies to share profits with employees. On top of, not instead of, good wages. Let's recognize the people doing the work, putting in the hours, they're the ones who should be sharing the rewards.

We should continue to crack down on wage theft and make overtime count, so companies that pay well can't be undercut by competitors paying poverty wages.

I believe we should strengthen unions, which have formed the bedrock of a strong middle class. It should be easier to bargain collectively. That's not only fair, it makes workers more productive, it strengthens our economy.

And let's close the loopholes that help companies ship jobs and profits overseas. Let's make companies that outsource jobs to other countries pay back the tax breaks they received while they were here in America. And if corporations try to move their headquarters to a foreign country to skip out on their tax bills--let's slap a new exit tax on them and then put that money to work in the communities left behind.

And we should extend the rules that were passed in Dodd-Frank on Wall Street after the crisis and strengthen them--both for the big banks and the shadow banking system. And I will veto any reforms to repeal those rules and vigorously enforce the law, with accountability, so Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again.

Fourth, let's make sure Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes.

When people say the game is rigged, the best evidence is the tax code. It's riddled with scams, loopholes, and special breaks, like the carried-interest loophole that lets some hedge fund managers pay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a nurse. That's not only unfair, it's bad economics, and we're going to stop it.

I have been saying that for years. As president, if Congress won't act, I will ask the Treasury Department to use its authority to close that loophole.

And here's another idea that I will be pushing: Let's pass the so-called Buffett Rule so top executives can't pay a lower rate than their secretaries.

And let's ask the wealthiest Americans to pay more--including a new tax on multimillionaires. That's not only the right thing to do, it's smart for our economy.

Because these steps will help pay for the investments we need in jobs and education without increasing our national debt. In fact, every program I have proposed in this campaign, I tell you how I will pay for it. Donald Trump and I disagree on a lot of things, and one of them is simple math.

Finally, here's our fifth goal: Let's put families first and make sure our policies match how you actually work and live in the 21st century.

Families look a lot different today than they did 30 years ago, and so do our jobs.

The movement of women into the workforce has produced enormous economic growth over the past few decades. But with women now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of families--there's more urgency than ever to make it easier for Americans to be good workers, good parents, and good caregivers, all at the same time.

The old model of work where you could expect to hold a steady job with good benefits for an entire career, is long gone. People in their 20s and 30s have come of age in an economy that's totally different. And a lot of young parents are discovering just how tough that is on families. Many people now have wildly unpredictable schedules, or they cobble together part-time work, or they've tried to go independent.

Flexibility can be good, but you shouldn't have to worry that your family could lose your health care or retirement savings just because you change jobs or start a small business.

Why do you think every other--I have to ask--why do you think every other advanced country has paid family leave? Do you think they are just unrealistic, or do you think that they have figured out they can have a stabler economy, they can support families? And that's what I want us to do. Working families need predictable scheduling, earned sick days and vacation days, quality affordable childcare and healthcare. These are not luxuries. They're economic necessities.

In today's economy, benefits should be flexible, portable, and comprehensive for everyone.

That means it's time to expand Social Security as well. Especially, especially for older women who are widowed, or have taken time out of the workforce to care for a loved one, and who are suffering financially because of that. We need to look to a secure retirement for everyone, and to provide families relief from crushing costs and health care, housing, and prescription drugs. I looked at the numbers and in some states, two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend up to 35 percent of their income on child care.

For a single parent, it could be 70 percent. So I will set a goal: Families shouldn't have to pay more than 10 percent of their income for child care. And I will repeat today what I have said throughout this campaign: I will not raise taxes on the middle class I will give you tax relief to raise these burdens.

Now, you know whenever I talk about these family issues, Donald Trump says I'm playing the "woman" card. Right? Well you know what I say, if fighting for child care and paid leave and equal pay is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

Here's what I want you to understand. It may be difficult to imagine all this getting done and Washington is so broken, I get that--but I really think that progress is possible or I would not be standing up here running to be president of the United States.

I know Republicans and Democrats can work together, because I've done it. As you heard Alicia say, I helped create the Children's Health Insurance Program when I was first lady. That happened with support with both parties. And it now it covers 8 million kids and when you go to get health care for your child, nobody says, "Are you a Republican or Democrat?" They say, "What does your child need?"

I worked with Republicans many times when I was a senator from New York and as secretary of state, so I know we can get results that will make real differences in people's lives.

I know however it's rare. There's no question that we need to make Washington work much better than it does today. And that means in particular: getting unaccountable money out of our politics.

One of the reasons this election is so important is because the Supreme Court stands in the balance. We need to overturn that terrible Supreme Court decision, Citizens United, and then go a lot further to reform our whole campaign finance system.

This is about our democracy--but it's also about our economy. Campaign finance reform and reducing the power of special interests is directly relevant to getting Washington working for the people again--making the right investments, putting your jobs and your economic security first.

That's why I'm so passionate about this issue, and I'm will fight hard to end the stranglehold that the wealthy and special interests have on so much of our government.

So, let's do this together. A historic investment in jobs. Debt-free college. Profit sharing. Making those at the top pay their fair share. Putting families first in our modern economy. And a democracy where working people's voices are actually heard. That is what we are fighting for in this election.

As I said during the primary I am a progressive who likes to get things done and we can do this.

Just for a minute, compare what I am proposing to what we hear from Donald Trump. The self-proclaimed "King of Debt" has no real ideas for making college more affordable or addressing the student debt crisis. He has no credible plan for rebuilding our infrastructure, apart from his wall. He has no real strategy for creating jobs, just a string of empty promises. Maybe we shouldn't expect better from someone whose most famous words are, "You're fired."

Well, here's what I want you to know: I do have a jobs program. And as president, I'm going to make sure you hear, "You're hired."

Here's the bottom line: Economists left, right, and center all agree Donald Trump will drive America back into recession. Just this week, one of Senator John McCain's former economic advisors said Trump's policies would wipe out, wipe out three-and-a-half million jobs. His tax cuts tilted toward the wealthy would add more than $30 trillion to our national debt over the next 20 years.

That is just astonishing and it's no wonder that the Economist Intelligence Unit, one of the leading firms that analyzes the top threats to the global economy, now ranks a Trump presidency No. 3, right behind problems in China and volatility in the commodities markets.

Look, I know Donald Trump hates it when anyone points out how hollow his sales pitch really is. I guess my speech yesterday must have gotten under his skin because right away he lashed out on Twitter with outlandish lies and conspiracy theories, and he did the same in his speech today.

Now think about it. He's going after me personally because he has no answers on the substance. In fact, he doubled down on being the King of Debt.

So all he can do is try to distract us. That's even why he's attacking my faith, sigh. And of course attacking a philanthropic foundation that saves and improves lives around the world.

It's no surprise he doesn't understand these things. The Clinton Foundation helps poor people around the world get access to life-saving AIDS medicine.

Donald Trump uses poor people around the world to produce his line of suits and ties. Here in North Carolina, you know as well as anyone that our economy is already too unpredictable for working families. We can't let Donald Trump bankrupt America the way he bankrupted his casinos. We need to write a new chapter in the American Dream--and it can't be Chapter 11.

Please, join me in this campaign, I'm offering a very different vision. We're stronger together. We're stronger when we grow together. We're stronger when our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top. I am convinced that if we work hard if we go into November with the confidence and optimism that should be the American birthright, we will not only win an election, we will chart the course to the future that we want and deserve.

Thank you and God bless you.

Hello! Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you all.

It is so great to be back in Pittsburgh. And it is especially great to be here with the men and women of the IBEW.

I want to thank Mike Dunleavy and IBEW Local 5 for welcoming us to your house. We are happy to be here. And, I want to thank my longtime friend, colleague, advocate, Leo Gerard, who has been a champion, not just for steelworkers, but for working people--fairness, the kind of economy that lifts everybody up, for as long as I've known him. I am so grateful to have the support of the steelworkers and IBEW. It means a lot to me because we want to put you all to work. We're going to have a lot of work to do in our country and nobody can do it better.

I want to recognize your County Executive, Rich Fitzgerald, and thank him for being such a great supporter, but, more than that, leading this county along with Mayor Bill Peduto, who has done such a great job to continue the renaissance of Pittsburgh. I want to join Leo in acknowledging your great Congressman Mike Doyle and your great Senator Bob Casey. There's another mayor here, Mayor John Fetterman. John is here. John is hard to miss, so he's here somewhere! I saw him somewhere earlier. I want to thank also City Councilwoman Natalia Rudiak, and I want to thank Josh Shapiro, your candidate for Attorney General, and a Montgomery County Commissioner, Reverend James Edward Brown, and, all of you for being with us today.

I always love coming to Pittsburgh and western Pennsylvania, and it's especially great to be here after the Penguins clinched the Stanley Cup again! It's great, quite a record now. They've got some ways to go before they match the Steelers in terms of winning it all but they're on their way. The County Executive and I were talking, and he said something that really struck me. The Penguins did this the old fashion way: teamwork, hard work, and resilience. And that's what we're going to do in this election. That's what we're going to do in our country.

When I planned this trip, I intended to give a different talk today. About how we make our economy work for everyone, not just those at the top, how do we reduce the economic inequality that's threatening not just our economy, but our democracy. How we rebuild our infrastructure, stand with our steelworkers against illegal dumping by China. And I wanted to talk too about how unions like yours, IBEW, and the steelworkers, and so many others, helped build the greatest middle class in the world. If anybody has a chair you can use it because don't worry, the folks behind you have sat down and everybody is seated. That's great.

You see, I draw from our history that labor is central to whatever we want to achieve. I'm going to be a strong partner and advocate for the American labor movement, for working people, for your rights and your opportunities to make the very best possible living in the greatest country on earth. These are the issues that are in my heart. I will be talking about them in the weeks ahead. They're really at the center of my campaign.

But today, there are different things on my mind--and probably on yours, too, as Leo said.

We are all still reeling from what happened on Sunday in Orlando. Another terrorist attack--not overseas, but here at home. So many Americans killed and wounded. A hate crime at an LGBT nightclub, right in the middle of Pride Month. The deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States.

The losses stretch all the way to Pennsylvania. Two of the victims were from this state. Akyra Murray, a high school basketball star from Philadelphia, was killed; she was just 18 years old. And her friend Patience Carter, also from Philadelphia, was shot. It's a poignant reminder that even in a country as big as ours, we are all connected. And our hearts are with Patience and Akyra's families, and all the families who are grieving now.

Since Sunday, we've been trying to make sense of what happened, and what we can do together to prevent future attacks.

Yesterday in Cleveland, I once again laid out my plan for defeating ISIS and the broader radical jihadist movement, around the world and online and for combating radicalization here at home, including a special focus on detecting and preventing so-called "lone wolf' attacks like we saw in Orlando and San Bernardino. These attacks are carried out by individuals who may or may not have any direct contact with an organization like ISIS, but are inspired, primarily over the internet, by its twisted ideology.

I reemphasized the importance of working with Muslim communities here at home, who are often the most likely to recognize radicalization before it's too late. After the attacks in Paris, Brussels and San Bernardino, I met with homeland security officials and Muslim community leaders in Minneapolis and Los Angeles, to hear their ideas for building stronger partnerships. We need to lift up voices of moderation and tolerance.

I also said something I've been saying from the very beginning of this campaign: I believe we Americans are capable of both protecting our Second Amendment rights while making sure guns don't fall into the wrong hands. The terrorist in Orlando was the definition of "the wrong hands.' And weapons of war have no place in our streets.

So the questions being debated this week about how we deal with the threat of terrorism are some of the most charged and important issues we face. And there are bound to be differences of opinion. In a country as diverse and complex as ours, I think that's a given.

But I believe that despite those differences, on a deeper level, we are all on the same team. We may not see eye to eye on everything, but we are all Americans. And there is so much more that unites us than divides us. I have said many times, I think it's appropriate for us, not to consider ourselves on the Republican team or the Democratic team, on the red team or the blue team, but to be on the American team. And after a terrible event, like Orlando, that's clearer than ever.

That's what we're seeing in Orlando and across America--people of different faiths, backgrounds, sexual orientations, and gender identities coming together to say with one voice, we won't let hate defeat us.

If we can count on that kind of unity and solidarity from each other -- if even the families of the Orlando victims are speaking out right now against hate and division -- we should certainly expect that from our leaders.

And I am sorry to say that is not what we are hearing from Donald Trump.

Donald Trump wants to be our next Commander in Chief. I think we all know that is a job that demands a calm, collected, and dignified response to these kinds of events. Instead, yesterday morning, just one day after the massacre, he went on TV and suggested that President Obama is on the side of the terrorists.

Just think about that for a second.

Even in a time of divided politics, this is beyond anything that should be said by someone running for President of the United States. And I have to ask -- will responsible Republican leaders stand up to their presumptive nominee? Or will they stand by his accusation about our President?

I am sure they would rather avoid that question altogether. But history will remember what we do in this moment.

What Donald Trump is saying is shameful. It is disrespectful to the people who were killed and wounded, and their families. And it is yet more evidence that he is temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be Commander in Chief.

Of course, he is a leader of the birther movement, which spread the lie that President Obama wasn't born in the United States. I guess he had to be reminded Hawaii is part of the United States. This is the man who claimed a distinguished federal judge born and raised in Indiana can't do his job because of his -- quote --"Mexican heritage.' I guess he has to be reminded Indiana is in the United States.

So maybe we shouldn't be surprised. But it was one thing when he was a reality TV personality. You know, raising his arms and yelling, you're fired. It is another thing altogether when he's the Republican Party's presumptive nominee for president.

Americans don't need conspiracy theories and pathological self-congratulations. We need leadership, common sense and concrete plans.

Because we are facing a brutal enemy. In the Middle East, ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities. They're slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways. They are beheading civilians, including executing LGBT people; murdering Americans and Europeans; enslaving, torturing, and raping women and girls.

The barbarity we face from radical jihadists is profound. So I would like to have a worthy debate on the best way to keep our country safe. That's what Americans deserve.

I read every word of Donald Trump's speech yesterday. And I sifted through all the bizarre rants and the outright lies.

What I found, once you cut through the nonsense, is that his plan comes down to two things.

First, he is fixated on the words "radical Islam.' I must say, I find this strange. Is Donald Trump suggesting that there are magic words that, once uttered, will stop terrorists from coming after us? Trump, as usual, is obsessed with name-calling. From my perspective, it matters what we do, not just what we say. In the end, it didn't matter what we called bin Laden -- it mattered that we got bin Laden.

I have clearly said that we face terrorist enemies who use a perverted version of Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people. We have to stop them, and we will. So if Donald suggests I won't call this threat what it is, he hasn't been listening.

But I will not demonize and declare war on an entire religion.

Now that we're past the semantic debate, Donald is going to have to come up with something better.

He's got one other idea. He wants to ban all Muslims from entering our country. And now he wants to go even further, and suspend all immigration from large parts of the world.

I've talked before about how this approach is un-American. It goes against everything we stand for as a country founded on religious freedom. But it is also dangerous. First, we rely on partners in Muslim countries to fight terrorists; this would make it harder. Second, we need to build trust in Muslim communities here at home to counter radicalization; and this would make it harder. Third, Trump's words will be, in fact they already are, a recruiting tool for ISIS to help increase its ranks of people willing to do what we saw in Orlando. And fourth, he's turning Americans against Americans, which is exactly what ISIS wants.

Leaders who've actually fought terrorists know this. General Petraeus said recently that "demonizing a religious faith and its adherents' will come at a great cost, not just to our values but to our men and women in uniform and our national security.

Commissioner Bill Bratton of the New York Police Department said this kind of talk makes his job harder. He has Muslims in his police force, he has Muslims in the community, he needs everybody working together against any potential threat.

But Donald won't listen to any of this. Not experts like General Petraeus or Commissioner Bratton, because he says he knows more about ISIS than the generals do. It's almost hard to think of what to say about that claim.

But in this instance, Donald's words are especially nonsensical. Because the terrorist who carried out this attack wasn't born in Afghanistan, as Donald Trump said yesterday. He was born in Queens -- just like Donald was himself. So Muslim bans and immigration reforms would not have stopped him. They would not have saved a single life in Orlando.

Those are the only two ideas Donald Trump put forward yesterday for how to fight ISIS.

Beyond that, he said a lot of false things, including about me. He said I'll abolish the Second Amendment. Well, that's wrong. He said I'll let a flood of refugees into our country without any screening. That's also wrong.

These are demonstrably lies. But he feels compelled to tell them -- because he has to distract us from the fact that he has nothing substantive to say for himself.

Much of the rest of his speech was spent denigrating not just the President, but the efforts of all the brave American service members, law enforcement agents, intelligence officers, diplomats and others who have worked so hard to keep our country safe. Donald says our military is a disaster and the world is laughing at us. Wrong again.

Since 9/11, America has done a great deal at home and abroad to stop terrorists. Thousands of Americans have fought and died. We have worked intensively with our allies, engaged in fierce and vital debates here at home about how far our government should go in monitoring threats. We have vastly increased security measures at airports, train stations, power plants and many other places. And the American people, we have all become more vigilant, even while we have carried on living our lives as normally as possible.

It has been a long and difficult effort. We've had successes, and we've also had failures. But one thing's for sure: the fight against terrorism has never been simple.

We need a Commander-in-Chief who is up to these challenges -- who can grapple with them in all their complexity -- someone with real plans and real solutions that actually address the problems we face. And we need someone with the temperament and experience to make those hard choices in the Situation Room -- not a loose cannon who could easily lead us into war.

One more thing. Donald Trump has been very clear about what he won't do. He won't stand up to the gun lobby.

The terrorist who killed 49 people and wounded 53 others in Orlando did it with two guns: a handgun and a Sig Sauer MCX rifle. If you don't know what that is, I urge you to Google it. See it for yourself.

This man had been investigated by the FBI for months. But we couldn't stop him from buying a powerful weapon that he used to slaughter Americans in large numbers.

Let's get this straight. We have reached the point where people can't board planes with full bottles of shampoo -- but people being watched by the FBI for suspected terrorist links can buy a gun with no questions asked. That is absurd.

It just seems like western Pennsylvania common sense, if you're too dangerous to get on a plane, you're too dangerous to buy a gun.

Enough is enough. Now is time for seriousness and resolve.

We need to go after ISIS overseas, we need to protect Americans here at home, counter their poisonous ideologies, support our first responders, take a hard look at our gun laws and we need to stand with the LGBT community and peaceful Muslim Americans, today and always.

In the days and weeks ahead, I will have more to say about how we will work together to keep our country and our citizens safe and take the fight to the terrorists. None of this will be easy. And none of it will be helped by anything that Donald Trump has to offer.

This is a time to set aside fear and division, and reach for unity. America is strongest when we all feel like we have a stake in our country. When we all have real chance to live up to our God-given potential, and we want others here to have that chance, too.

We've always been a country of "we,' not "me.' And we've always been stronger together.

We are stronger when people can participate in our democracy, share in the rewards of our economy, and contribute to our communities.

When we bridge our divides and lift each other up, instead of tearing each other down.

Here in Pennsylvania and across America, I have listened to so many people tell me about the problems that keep you and your families up at night. Despite all the progress we've made, there's not yet enough growth, which creates good jobs and raises incomes. There's not yet enough economic fairness, so that everyone who works hard can share in the rewards. We need both -- a "growth and fairness' economy. Where profits and paychecks rise together.

So many people have talked to me about how the bonds that hold us together as one national community are strained -- by too much inequality, too little upward mobility, social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future.

As your president, I will work every day to break down all the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart. And I will be on your side.

I'll have the back of every steelworker getting knocked around by unfair competition. Of every working mom trying to raise her kids on minimum wage or unequal pay. Of every union member struggling to keep going in the face of concerted attacks on workers' rights -- because "right to work' is wrong for workers, and we need to stand strong with unions.

Together, I want us to forge a new sense of connection and a shared responsibility to each other and our nation.

I know that's possible, because I have seen it throughout our history -- including just this week.

Some of you may have noticed a letter that went viral on the internet over the past few days. The letter is from George H.W. Bush's presidential library. I hadn't read it in a long time -- until yesterday. And it moved me to tears, just like it did all those years ago.

It's the letter that President Bush left in the Oval Office for my husband, back in January of 1993. They had just fought a fierce campaign. Bill won, President Bush lost. In a democracy, that's how it goes.

But when Bill walked into that office for the very first time as President, that note was waiting for him. It had some good advice about staying focused on what mattered, despite the critics. It wished him happiness. And it concluded with these words:

"You will be our President when you read this note. I wish you well. I wish your family well. Your success is now our country's success. And I am rooting hard for you. George.'

That's the America we love. That is what we cherish and expect.

So let us come together, we can disagree without being disagreeable, we can root for each other's success. Where our President is everyone's President, and our future belongs to us all.

Let's make this once again the big-hearted, fair-minded country we all know and love. Thank you all very much.

I am absolutely delighted to be back in Cleveland and to be here at the Industrial Innovation Center. I've had a chance to learn about the great work you're doing.

I especially want to applaud "Team Wendy" for everything you do to protect our troops, first responders, and others from Traumatic Brain Injury. It is so important that we continue to support those who protect us.

Thank you. Thank you all. It's good to be back in Cleveland, I can tell you that.

I want to thank your extraordinary Senator, Sherrod Brown, for his leadership and for that very kind and generous introduction. You are very fortunate to have him representing you. I want to thank your Congresswoman Marcia Fudge, who is both indomitable and indefatigable. She is such a tenacious advocate for the people she represents. I want to acknowledge the mayor, Mayor Jackson, who is here, County Executive Budish, and I particularly want to recognize the passing of George Voinovich.

He devoted his life to serving the people of Ohio as Mayor of Cleveland, as Governor and Senator. And we send our prayers and sympathy to his family.

I also want to thank Dan Moore, the owner and founder of this company and Team Wendy, for his belief in Cleveland, for his commitment to create jobs. I can't wait to work with him, to do more of what he has accomplished too.

You know, originally I had intended to come to Cleveland under very different circumstances. We are heading into a general election that could be the most consequential of our lifetimes.

But today is not a day for politics.

On Sunday, Americans woke up to a nightmare that's become mind-numbingly familiar: Another act of terrorism in a place no one expected. A madman filled with hate, with guns in his hands and just a horrible sense of vengeance and vindictiveness in his heart, apparently consumed by rage against LGBT Americans--and by extension, the openness and diversity that defines our American way of life.

We will learn more about the killer in the days to come. We know that he pledged allegiance to ISIS, that they are now taking credit, and that part of their strategy is to radicalize individuals and encourage attacks against the United States, even if they are not coordinated with ISIS leadership.

But there's a lot we still don't know, including what other mix of motives drove him to kill. The more we learn about what happened, the better we'll be able to protect our people.

In the days ahead, we will also learn more about the many lives he viciously cut short--many of them young people just starting out in their lives.

They were travel agents and pharmacy techs, college students and amusement park workers--sons and daughters, brothers and sisters--and they had one thing in common: they all had a lot more to give.

We should all take a moment today, amid our busy lives, to think about them, to pray for everyone who was killed, for the wounded, those who are fighting to regain their lives and futures. For our first responders who walked into danger one more time.

As a mother, I can't imagine what those families are going through.

Let's also remember the other scenes we saw on Sunday:

We saw the faces of those first responders who rushed into danger to save as many people as they could.

We saw survivors like Chris Hansen who risked their lives to help others.

People gathering outside hospitals to comfort anxious family members waiting for news of their loved ones, and waiting too, to learn more about what they could do to make sure this never happened again.

Religious leaders condemning hate and appealing for peace. People lining up to donate blood. Americans refusing to be intimidated or divided.

Yesterday, I called Mayor Dyer of Orlando and offered my support and my appreciation for the leadership that he and the other officials have shown.

This is a moment when all Americans need to stand together.

No matter how many times we endure attacks like this, the horror never fades. The murder of innocent people breaks our hearts, tears at our sense of security, and makes us furious.

Now we have to steel our resolve and respond. That's what I want to talk to you about: how we respond.

The Orlando terrorist may be dead, but the virus that poisoned his mind remains very much alive. We must attack it with clear eyes, steady hands, unwavering determination and pride in our country and our values.

I have no doubt we can meet this challenge--if we meet it together.

Whatever we learn about this killer, his motives in the days ahead, we know already the barbarity we face from radical jihadists is profound.

In the Middle East, ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities, they are slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways, they are beheading civilians, including executing LGBT people, they are murdering Americans and Europeans, enslaving, torturing, and raping women and girls.

In speeches like this one after Paris, Brussels, and San Bernardino, I have laid out a plan to defeat ISIS and the other radical jihadist groups in the region and beyond.

The attack in Orlando makes it even more clear: we cannot contain this threat--we must defeat it.

The good news is that the coalition effort in Syria and Iraq has made real gains in recent months.

So we should keep the pressure on ramping up the air campaign, accelerating support for our friends fighting to take and hold ground, and pushing our partners in the region to do even more.

We also need continued American leadership to help resolve the political conflicts that fuel ISIS recruitment efforts.

But as ISIS loses actual ground in Iraq and Syria, it will seek to stage more attacks and gain stronger footholds wherever it can, from Afghanistan to Libya to Europe.

The threat is metastasizing. We saw this in Paris and we saw it in Brussels.

We face a twisted ideology and poisoned psychology that inspires the so-called "lone wolves"--radicalized individuals who may or may not have contact and direction from any formal organization.

So yes, efforts to defeat ISIS on the battlefield must succeed. But it will take more than that. We have to be just as adaptable and versatile as our enemies.

As president, I will make identifying and stopping lone wolves a top priority. I will put a team together from across the entire government, as well as the private sector, and our communities to get on top of this urgent challenge. And I'll make sure our law enforcement and intelligence professionals have the resources they need to get the job done.

As we do this, there are three areas that demand attention.

First, we and our allies must work hand-in-hand to dismantle the networks that move money, and propaganda and arms and fighters around the world.

We have to flow--we have to stem the flow of jihadists from Europe and America to Iraq, Syria, and Afghanistan--and then back again. The only way to do this is by working closely with our partners. Strengthening our alliances, not weakening them or walking away from them.

Second, here at home, we must harden our own defenses.

We have to do more to support our first responders, law enforcement, and intelligence officers who do incredible work every day--at great personal risk--to keep our country safe. I have seen first-hand how hard their job is and how well they do it.

In Orlando, at least one police officer was shot in the head. Thankfully, his life was saved by a Kevlar helmet--something folks here at Team Wendy know a lot about.

It's often been said that our law enforcement, our intelligence agencies, and our first responders have to be right 100 percent of the time. A terrorist only has to be right once. What a heavy responsibility.

These men and women deserve both our respect and gratitude, and the right tools, resources, and training. Too often, state and local officials can't get access to intelligence from the federal government that would help them do their jobs.

We need to change that.

We also need to work with local law enforcement and business owners on ways to protect vulnerable, so called "soft targets" like nightclubs and shopping malls and hotels and movie theaters and schools and houses of worship.

Now, I know a lot of Americans are asking how it was possible that someone already on the FBI's radar could have still been able to commit an attack like the one in Orlando--and what more we can do to stop this kind of thing from happening again.

Well, we have to see what the investigation uncovers. If there are things that can and should be done to improve our ability to prevent, we must do them.

We already know we need more resources for this fight. The professionals who keep us safe would be the first to say we need better intelligence to discover and disrupt terrorist plots before they can be carried out. That's why I've proposed an "intelligence surge" to bolster our capabilities across the board, with appropriate safeguards here at home.

Even as we make sure our security officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks, it's essential that we stop terrorists from getting the tools they need to carry out the attacks--and that is especially true when it comes to assault weapons like those used in Orlando and San Bernardino. I believe weapons of war have no place on our streets.

We may have our disagreements on gun safety regulations, but we should all be able to agree on a few things.

If the FBI is watching you for suspected terrorist links, you shouldn't be able to just go buy a gun with no questions asked. You shouldn't be able to exploit loopholes and evade criminal background checks by buying online or at a gun show.

And yes, if you're too dangerous to get on a plane, you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America.

I know some will say that assault weapons and background checks are totally separate issues having nothing to do with terrorism.

Well, in Orlando and San Bernardino, terrorists used assault weapons, the AR-15, and they used it to kill Americans. That was the same assault weapon used to kill those little children in Sandy Hook. We have to make it harder for people who should not have those weapons of war.

That might not stop every shooting or terrorist attack. But it will stop some and it will save lives and it will protect our first responders. And I want you to know I'm not going to stop fighting for these kinds of provisions.

The third area that demands attention is preventing radicalization, and countering efforts by ISIS and other international terrorist networks to recruit in the United States and Europe.

For starters, it is long past time for the Saudis, the Qataris, the Kuwaitis and others to stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations. And they should stop supporting radical schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path toward extremism.

We also have to use all our capabilities to counter jihadist propaganda online. This is something I spent a lot of time on at the State Department. As president, I will work with our great tech companies from Silicon Valley to Boston to step up our game.

We have to do a better job intercepting ISIS's communications, tracking and analyzing social media posts, and mapping jihadist networks, as well as promoting credible voices who can provide alternatives to radicalization.

And there is more work to do offline as well.

Since 9/11, law enforcement agencies have worked hard to build relationships with Muslim-American communities. Millions of peace-loving Muslims live, work, and raise their families across America. They are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it's too late, and the best positioned to help us block it. We should be intensifying contacts in those communities, not scapegoating or isolating them.

Last year, I visited a pilot program in Minneapolis that helps parents, teachers, imams, mental health professionals, and others recognize signs of radicalization in young people and work with law enforcement to intervene before it's too late.

I've also met with local leaders pursuing innovative approaches in Los Angeles and other places. We need more efforts like that, in more cities across America. And, as the Director of the FBI has pointed out, we should avoid eroding trust in the community, which will only make law enforcement's job more difficult.

Inflammatory, anti-Muslim rhetoric--and threatening to ban the families and friends of Muslim Americans, as well as millions of Muslim business people and tourists from entering our country--hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror. So does saying that we have to start special surveillance on our fellow Americans because of their religion.

It's no coincidence that hate crimes against American Muslims and mosques have tripled after Paris and San Bernardino.

That's wrong and it's also dangerous. It plays right into the terrorists' hands.

Still, as I have said before, none of us can close our eyes to the fact that we do face enemies who use their distorted version of Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people. They'd take us all back to the Stone Age if they could, just as they have in parts of Iraq and Syria.

The terrorist in Orlando targeted LGBT Americans out of hatred and bigotry. And an attack on any American is an attack on all Americans.

I want to say this to all the LGBT people grieving today in Florida and across our country: you have millions of allies who will always have your back. And I am one of them.

From Stonewall to Laramie and now Orlando, we've seen too many examples of how the struggle to live freely, openly and without fear has been met by violence. We have to stand together. Be proud together. There is no better rebuke to the terrorists and all those who hate.

Our open, diverse society is an asset in the struggle against terrorism, not a liability. It makes us stronger and more resistant to radicalization. This raises a larger point about the future of our country.

America is strongest when we all believe they have a stake in our country and our future. This vision has sustained us from the beginning--the belief that yes, we are all created equal and the journey we have made to turn that into reality over our history. That we are not a land of winners and losers. That we all should have the opportunity to live up to our God-given potential, and we have a responsibility to help others to do so as well.

As I look at American history, I see this has always been a country of "we" not "me." We stand together because we are stronger together.

E pluribus unum--out of many, one--has seen us through the darkest chapters of our history. Even since 13 squabbling colonies put aside their disagreements and united, because they realized they were going to rise together or fall separately.

Generation after generation has fought and marched and organized to widen the circle of dignity and opportunity--ending slavery, securing and expanding the right to vote, throwing open the doors of education, building the greatest middle class the world has ever seen.

We are stronger when more people can participate in our democracy. And we are stronger when everyone can share in the rewards of our economy, and contribute to our communities.

When we bridge our divides and lift each other up, instead of tearing each other down.

We have overcome a lot together, and we will overcome the threats of terror and radicalization and our other challenges.

Here in Ohio, and all across America, I've listened to people talk about the problems that keep them up at night.

The bonds that hold us together as communities--as one national community--are strained by an economy with too much inequality and too little upward mobility, by social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future.

I have heard that, and I want you to know as your president I will work every day to break down the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart. We are going to get an economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top. We are going to forge a new sense of connection and shared responsibility to each other and our nation.

Finally, let us remind us all, I remember how it felt on the day after 9/11. I'll bet you do as well.

Americans from every walk of life rallied together with a sense of common purpose on September the 12th. And in the days and weeks and months that followed we had each other's backs.

I was a senator from New York. There was a Republican president, a Republican governor, and a Republican mayor. We did not attack each other--we worked with each other to protect our country and to rebuild our city.

President Bush went to a Muslim community center just six days after the attacks to send a message of unity and solidarity. To anyone who wanted to take out their anger on our Muslim neighbors and fellow citizens, he said, "That should not and that will not stand in America."

It is time to get back to the spirit of those days. The Spirit of 9/12. Let's make sure we keep looking to the best of country, to the best within each of us.

Democratic and Republican presidents have risen to the occasion in the face of tragedy. That is what we are called to do my friends, and I am so confident and optimistic that is exactly what we will do.

Thank you all so much.

Thank you. Hello. Thank you, thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you all. I have to say, pink never looked so good.

I want to thank my friend, and your courageous leader, Cecile Richards. Cecile really is the definition of grace under pressure. She has proven that time and time again over the course of her career, particularly over the last few years. She really is like another great American, her mother, Ann Richards, who was a friend of mine, and I just wish Ann were here to see this election. She'd have Donald Trump tweeting double time.

We reached a milestone together this week. Thanks to you, and people all over our country, for the first time, a woman will be a major party's nominee for President of the United States.

And yesterday, I had the great honor of being endorsed by President Obama and Vice President Biden. And by Senator Elizabeth Warren.

So it's been a big week. And there's nowhere I'd rather end it than right here, with the Planned Parenthood Action Fund.

I'm grateful to the entire Planned Parenthood family. You made this campaign your own. Whether you knocked on doors in Iowa or rallied in California, this victory belongs to all of you.

It belongs to the one thousand young activists who came together in Pittsburgh last month to get organized.

It belongs to the staff, the donors, and to the providers. Providers like Dr. Amna Dermish in Texas, who called out Donald Trump when he said women should be punished for having abortions. And the open letter she wrote defending her patients' right to make their own health decisions should be required reading for every politician in America.

I am deeply conscious of the reality that this victory belongs to generations of brave women and men who fought for the radical idea that women should determine our own lives and futures.

And it belongs to the women and men who continue to fight for that idea today, even in the face of threats and violence.

When a man who never should have had a gun killed three people at Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs, leaders in this room voted unanimously to keep health centers across America open the next day.
The CEO, the CEO of Planned Parenthood Rocky Mountains made a promise to patients in Colorado and beyond when she said: "Our doors -- and our hearts -- stay open.'

That is really what Planned Parenthood is all about.

So today, I want to say something you don't hear often enough: thank you.

Thank you for being there for women, no matter their race, sexual orientation, or immigration status.

Thank you for being there for Natarsha McQueen in Brooklyn, who told me how Planned Parenthood caught her breast cancer when she was just 33 years old, and saved her life.

Thank you for being there for college students getting STD testing. The young people who have the tough questions that they're afraid to ask their parents. The sexual assault survivors who turn to Planned Parenthood for compassionate care. The transgender teens who come for an appointment and find the first place where they can truly be themselves.

Thank you for being there for your communities -- whether that means taking on hostile politicians in Louisiana or handing out clean drinking water in Flint, Michigan.

And thank you for being there for every woman in every state who has to miss work; drive hundreds of miles sometimes; endure cruel, medically unnecessary waiting periods; walk past angry protesters to exercise her constitutional right to safe and legal abortion.

I've been proud to stand with Planned Parenthood for a long time. And as president, I will always have your back.

Because I know for a century, Planned Parenthood has worked to make sure that the women, men, young people who count on you can lead their best lives -- healthy, safe and free to follow their dreams.

Just think when Planned Parenthood was founded, women couldn't vote or serve on juries in most states. It was illegal even to provide information about birth control, let alone prescribe it.

But people marched and organized. They protested unjust laws and, in some cases, even went to prison. And slowly but surely, America changed for the better.

51 years ago this week, thanks to a Planned Parenthood employee named Estelle Griswold, the Supreme Court legalized birth control for married couples across America. When I used to teach law, and I would point to this case, a look of total bewilderment would come across my students' faces. And not long after that, Roe v. Wade guaranteed the right to safe, legal abortion.

So young women were no longer dying in emergency rooms and back alleys from botched, illegal abortions. And this is a fact that is not often heard, but I hope you will repeat it: America's maternal mortality rate dropped dramatically.

And it turns out, being able to plan their families not only saved women's lives, it also transformed them -- because it meant that women were able to get educations, build careers, enter new fields, and rise as far as their talent and hard work would take them -- all the opportunities that follow when women are able to stay healthy and choose whether and when to become mothers.

And you know so well, today, the percentage of women who finish college is six times what it was before birth control was legal. Women represent half of all college graduates in America and nearly half our labor force.

And our whole economy, then, is better off. The movement of women into the workforce, the paid workforce, over the past 40 years was responsible for more than three and a half trillion dollars in growth in our economy.

And here's another fact that doesn't get much attention: unintended pregnancy, teen pregnancy, and abortion rates are at all time record lows. That reality and studies confirm what Planned Parenthood knew all along: Accurate sex education and effective, affordable contraception work.

And, it wasn't so long ago, Republicans and Democrats could actually stand together on these issues. Back in the "90s, when I helped create the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, I worked with Republicans to get it done.

Now things feel quite a bit different now, don't they?

Instead of working to continue the progress we've made, Republicans, led now by Donald Trump, are working to reverse it.

When Donald Trump says, "Let's make America great again,' that is code for "let's take America backward.' Back to a time when opportunity and dignity were reserved for some, not all. Back to the days when abortion was illegal, women had far fewer options, and life for too many women and girls was limited.

Well, Donald, those days are over.

We are not going to let Donald Trump or anyone else turn back the clock.

And that means we've got to get to work. Because as you know better than anyone, right now, across the country, rights that women should be able to take for granted are under attack.

Any day now, the Supreme Court will rule on the Texas law that imposes burdensome and medically unnecessary requirements on abortion providers. If these restrictions are allowed to stand, 5.4 million women of reproductive age will be left with about 10 health centers that provide abortion -- in a state the size of France. It is the biggest challenge to Roe v. Wade in a generation.

It's also yet another reminder of what's at stake on the Supreme Court. President Obama has done his job, and nominated Merrick Garland to be the ninth justice. It's time for Senate Republicans to do their job. The Senate should give Judge Garland the hearing he deserves.

Now, meanwhile, in just the first three months of 2016, states across the country introduced more than 400 restrictions on abortion. 11 states have defunded Planned Parenthood in the last year, cutting some women off from their only health care provider. And of course, on a national level, Republicans in Congress have been willing to shut down the entire federal government over Planned Parenthood funding.

Have you ever noticed that the same politicians who are against sex education, birth control, and safe and legal abortion, are also against policies that would make it easier to raise a child -- like paid family leave?

They are for limited government everywhere except when it comes to interfering with women's choices and rights.

Well I'm here today to tell you we need to be just as determined as they are. 
We need to defend Planned Parenthood against partisan attacks. If right-wing politicians actually cared as much about protecting women's health as they say they do, they'd join me in calling for more federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

We also need to fight back against the erosion of reproductive rights at the federal, state, and local levels, and ensure that patients and staff can safely walk into health centers without harassment or violence.

We need to, we need to stand up for access to affordable contraception, without interference from politicians or employers. And let's invest in long-acting reversible contraceptives, so every woman can choose the method that is best for her. Let's strengthen and improve the Affordable Care Act, which covers 20 million Americans and saves women millions of dollars through no-copay preventive care.

Let's take action to stop the spread of the Zika virus, which threatens the health of children and pregnant women.

Let's repeal laws like the Hyde Amendment that make it nearly impossible, make it nearly impossible for low-income women, disproportionately women of color, to exercise their full reproductive rights.

And, it is worth saying again: defending women's health means defending access to abortion -- not just in theory, but in reality. We know that restricting access doesn't make women less likely to end a pregnancy. It just makes abortion less safe. And that then threatens women's lives.

For too long, issues like these have been dismissed by many as "women's issues' -- as though that somehow makes them less worthy, secondary.

Well, yes, these are women's issues. They're also family issues. They're economic issues. They're justice issues. They're fundamental to our country and our future.

Beyond these specific issues, we need to keep working to support women and families in other ways -- by getting incomes rising, including the minimum wage, which disproportionately affects women; we need to finally guarantee equal pay for women's work; we need to pass comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship that keeps families together; and we need to break down all the barriers of discrimination and systemic racism that hold too many Americans back.

We need to come together to stop the epidemic of gun violence that is stalking our country. No parent should live in fear that their child will be hurt or killed by gun violence. 33,000 Americans are killed every year. I've met so many mothers on this campaign who have lost their own children. We owe it to them to protect our kids no matter what ZIP code they live in. And that is going to require standing up to the gun lobby and making this a voting issue.

All the issues we're talking about today are connected. They intersect. And that's why I'm grateful to the reproductive justice leaders in this room and across America. Because you know that all those issues go straight to that fundamental question: whether we believe women and families of all races and backgrounds and income levels deserve an equal shot in life.

Now that's what I believe and you won't be surprised to hear -- Donald Trump believes something very different.

He actually thinks guaranteeing paid family leave would leave America less competitive. He says if women want equal pay, we should just -- and this is a quote -- "do as good a job' as men -- as if we weren't already.

He wants to appoint justices who want to overturn Roe V. Wade. He of course wants to defund Planned Parenthood. And he wants to go after so many of the fundamental rights we have, including safe and legal abortions. And he actually said, "women should be punished for having abortions.' Now, once he said that there was an outcry, as there should have been, and he tried to walk back his comments. He's doing that a lot lately.

But anyone who would so casually agree to the idea of punishing women -- like it was nothing to him, the most obvious thing in the world -- that is someone who doesn't hold women in high regard. Because if he did, he'd trust women to make the right decisions for ourselves.

But don't worry. Donald assures us that, as President, he'll be -- and I quote again -- "the best for women.'

Anyone who wants to defund Planned Parenthood, and wipe out safe, legal abortion has no idea what's best for women.

And after all this is a man who has called women "pigs,' "dogs,' and "disgusting animals.' Kind of hard to imagine counting on him to respect our fundamental rights?

When he says pregnant women are an "inconvenience' to their employer, what does that say about how he values women -- our work, our contributions?

We're in the middle of a concerted, persistent assault on women's health across our country. And we have to ask ourselves and ask everyone we come in contact with: Do we want to put our health, our lives, our futures in Donald Trump's hands?

Now, these questions aren't hypothetical. Every woman -- and everyone who cares about women -- will answer them when they vote in November. 
When I talk like this, Donald Trump likes to say I'm playing the "woman card.' And I like to say, if fighting for equal pay, Planned Parenthood, and the ability to make our own health decisions is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

Now my friends, I come to this issue, of course as a woman, a mother, and a grandmother now. But I also come to it as a former First Lady, Senator, and Secretary of State. And in those roles, in those roles, I traveled to parts of the world where girls are married off as soon as they are old enough to bear children. Places where the denial of family planning consigns women to lives of hardship.

I visited countries where governments have strictly regulated women's reproduction -- either forcing women to have abortions or forcing women to get pregnant and give birth.

Everything I have seen has convinced me that life is freer, fairer, healthier, safer, and far more humane when women are empowered to make their own reproductive health decisions.

And everything I've heard from Donald Trump, often seems to echo other leaders who have a very different view of women.

The late, great Maya Angelou said: "When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time.'

Donald Trump has shown us who he is. And we sure should believe him.
It's not just on reproductive rights. Donald Trump would take us in the wrong direction on so many issues we care about -- economic justice, workers' rights, civil rights, human rights, the environment--all of that is on the line in this election.

When Donald Trump says a distinguished judge born in Indiana can't do his job because of his Mexican heritage, or mocks a reporter with disabilities, or denigrates Muslims and immigrants, it goes against everything we stand for. He does not see all Americans as Americans.

So this election isn't about the same old fights between Democrats and Republicans. They'll be there, don't worry. But this election is profoundly different. It's about who we are as a nation. It's about millions of Americans coming together to say: We are better than this.

So here's my promise to you today: I will be your partner in this election and over the long haul.

Together, we are taking on the attacks and together we'll come out stronger -- just like Planned Parenthood has, time and again.

And together we're going to unify our country, stop Donald Trump, and fight for an America where we lift each other up, instead of tearing each other down.

We're not just going to break that highest and hardest glass ceiling. We're going to break down all the barriers that hold women and families back.

We're stronger when every family in every community knows they're not on their own. We are stronger together and we are going to make history again in November.

Thank you all so, so much.

one that you have taken with me and I am so grateful to you. It is wonderful to be back in Brooklyn, here in this []. And it may be hard to see tonight, but we are all standing under a glass ceiling right now. But don't worry, we're not smashing this one.

Thanks to you, we've reached a milestone -- the first time in our nation's history that a woman will be a major party's nominee for president of the United States.

Tonight's victory is not about one person. It belongs to generations of women and men who struggled and sacrificed and made this moment possible. In our country, it started right here in New York, a place called Seneca Falls, in 1848. When a small but determined group of women, and men, came together with the idea that women deserved equal rights, and they set it forth in something called the Declaration of Sentiments, and it was the first time in human history that that kind of declaration occurred.

So we all owe so much to those who came before, and tonight belongs to all of you.

I want to thank all the volunteers, community leaders, the activists, and organizers who supported our campaign in every state and territory. And thanks especially to our friends in New Jersey for such a resounding victory tonight. Thanks for talking to your neighbors, for making contributions. Your efforts have produced a strong majority of the popular vote, victories in a majority of the contests, and after tonight, a majority of pledged delegates.

I want to thank all the people across our country who have taken the time to talk with me. I've learned a lot about you and I've learned about those persistent problems and the unfinished promise of America that you are living with. So many of you feel like you are out there on your own, that no one has your back. Well, I do. I hear you, I see you.

And as your president, I will always have your back. I want to congratulate Senator Sanders for the extraordinary campaign he has run. He has spent his long career in public service fighting for progressive causes and principles, and he's excited millions of voters, especially young people. And let there be no mistake: Senator Sanders, his campaign, and the vigorous debate that we've had about how to raise incomes, reduce inequality, increase upward mobility have been very good for the Democratic Party and for America.

This has been a hard-fought, deeply-felt campaign. But whether you supported me, or Senator Sanders, or one of the Republicans, we all need to keep working toward a better, fairer, stronger America.
Now, I know it never feels good to put your heart into a cause or a candidate you believe in -- and to come up short. I know that feeling well. But as we look ahead to the battle that awaits, let's remember all that unites us.
We all want an economy with more opportunity and less inequality, where Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again. We all want a government that listens to the people, not the power brokers, which means getting unaccountable money out of politics. And we all want a society that is tolerant, inclusive, and fair.

We all believe that America succeeds when more people share in our prosperity; when more people have a voice in our political system; when more people can contribute to their communities. We believe that cooperation is better than conflict, unity is better than division, empowerment is better than resentment, and bridges are better than walls

It's a simple but powerful idea. We believe that we are stronger together. And the stakes in this election are high. And the choice is clear.

Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be president and commander-in-chief. And he's not just trying to build a wall between America and Mexico -- he's trying to wall off Americans from each other. When he says, "Let's make America great again,' that is code for, "Let's take America backwards.' Back to a time when opportunity and dignity were reserved for some, not all, promising his supporters an economy he cannot recreate.

We, however, we want to write the next chapter in American greatness, with a 21st century prosperity that lifts everyone who's been left out and left behind, including those who may not vote for us but who deserve their chance to make a new beginning.

When Donald Trump says a distinguished judge born in Indiana can't do his job because of his Mexican heritage -- or he mocks a reporter with disabilities -- or calls women "pigs'-- it goes against everything we stand for. Because we want an America where everyone is treated with respect and where their work is valued.

It's clear that Donald Trump doesn't believe we are stronger together. He has abused his primary opponents and their families, attacked the press for asking tough questions, denigrated Muslims and immigrants. He wants to win by stoking fear and rubbing salt in wounds. And reminding us daily just how great he is.

Well, we believe we should lift each other up, not tear each other down. We believe we need to give Americans a raise -- not complain that hardworking people's wages are too high. We believe we need to help young people struggling with student debt -- not pile more on to our national debt with giveaways to the super-wealthy. We believe we need to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century -- not insist that climate change is a hoax.

To be great, we can't be small. We have to be as big as the values that define America. And we are a big-hearted, fair-minded country. We teach our children that this is one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way or love a certain way. For all. Indivisible.

This election is not, however, about the same old fights between Democrats and Republicans. This election is different. It really is about who we are as a nation. It's about millions of Americans coming together to say: We are better than this. We won't let this happen in America.

And if you agree -- whether you're a Democrat, Republican or independent -- I hope you'll join us.

In just a few weeks, we will meet in Philadelphia, which gave birth to our nation -- back in that hot summer of 1776. Those early patriots knew they would all rise or fall together. Well, today that's more true than ever.
Our campaign will take this message to every corner of our country. We're stronger when our economy works for everyone, not just those at the top, with good-paying jobs and good schools in every ZIP code, and a real commitment to all families and all regions of our nation.

We're stronger when we work with our allies around the world to keep us safe. And we are stronger when we respect each other, listen to each other, and act with a sense of common purpose.

We're stronger when every family in every community knows they're not on their own, because we are in this together. It really does "take a village' to raise a child -- and to build a stronger future for us all.

I learned this a long time ago, from the biggest influence in my life: my mother. She was my rock, from the day I was born till the day she left us. She overcame a childhood marked by abandonment and mistreatment, and somehow managed not to become bitter or broken. My mother believed that life is about serving others. And she taught me never to back down from a bully, which, it turns out, was pretty good advice.

This past Saturday would have been her 97th birthday, because she was born on June 4th, 1919. And some of you may know the significance of that date. On the very day my mother was born in Chicago, Congress was passing the 19th Amendment to the Constitution. That amendment finally gave women the right to vote. And I really wish my mother could be here tonight. I wish she could see what a wonderful mother Chelsea has become, and could meet our beautiful granddaughter Charlotte. And of course, I wish she could see her daughter become the Democratic Party's nominee for president of the United States.

So yes, yes, there are still ceilings to break -- for women and men, for all of us. But don't let anyone tell you that great things can't happen in America. Barriers can come down. Justice and equality can win. Our history has moved in that direction -- slowly at times, but unmistakably -- thanks to generations of Americans who refused to give up or back down.

Now you are writing a new chapter of that story. This campaign is about making sure there are no ceilings -- no limits -- on any of us. And this is our moment to come together.

So please, join our campaign. Volunteer. Go to hillaryclinton.com. Contribute what you can. Text Join, J-O-I-N, to 4-7-2-4-6. Help us organize in all 50 states. Every phone call you make, every door you knock on will move us forward.

Now, I'm going to take a moment later tonight and the days ahead to fully absorb the history we've made here. But what I care about most is the history our country has yet to write. Our children and grandchildren will look back at this time, at the choices we are about to make, the goals we will strive for, the principles we will live by. And we need to make sure that they can be proud of us.

The end of the primaries is only the beginning of the work we're called to do. But if we stand together, we will rise together, because we are stronger together. Let's go out and make that case to America.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.

Hillary Clinton delivered the following address on national security in San Diego.

Thank you, thank you so much. Thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you San Diego for that warm, warm welcome and thanks to Ellen for those moving words, her introduction, and for reminding us it's not only our men and women in uniform that serve our country, it's their families, their spouses, their children, and we are grateful to each and every one of them. I want to recognize and thank Congressman Scott Peters for being here, thank you very much.

And all of the other electeds and service members, active duty and retired National Guard and Reservists, veterans, military spouses, family members, all who are with us today.

On Monday, we observed Memorial Day a day that means a great deal to San Diego, home of so many active-duty and former military and their families. We honor the sacrifice of those who died for our country in many ways by living our values, by making this a stronger and fairer nation, and by carrying out a smart and principled foreign policy.

That's what I want to speak about today the challenges we face in protecting our country, and the choice at stake in this election.

It's a choice between a fearful America that's less secure and less engaged with the world, and a strong, confident America that leads to keep our country safe and our economy growing.

As secretary of state, senator and first lady, I had the honor of representing America abroad and helping shape our foreign policy at home. As a candidate for president, there's nothing I take more seriously than our national security. I've offered clear strategies for how to defeat ISIS, strengthen our alliances, and make sure Iran never gets a nuclear weapon. And I'm going to keep America's security at the heart of my campaign.

Because as you know so well, Americans aren't just electing a president in November. We're choosing our next Commander-in-Chief he person we count on to decide questions of war and peace, life and death.

And like many across our country and around the world, I believe the person the Republicans have nominated for president cannot do the job.

Donald Trump's ideas aren't just different they are dangerously incoherent. They're not even really ideas just a series of bizarre rants, personal feuds, and outright lies.

He is not just unprepared he is temperamentally unfit to hold an office that requires knowledge, stability and immense responsibility.

This is not someone who should ever have the nuclear codes because it's not hard to imagine Donald Trump leading us into a war just because somebody got under his very thin skin.

We cannot put the security of our children and grandchildren in Donald Trump's hands. We cannot let him roll the dice with America.

This is a man who said that more countries should have nuclear weapons, including Saudi Arabia.

This is someone who has threatened to abandon our allies in NATO the countries that work with us to root out terrorists abroad before they strike us at home.

He believes we can treat the U.S. economy like one of his casinos and default on our debts to the rest of the world, which would cause an economic catastrophe far worse than anything we experienced in 2008.

He has said that he would order our military to carry out torture and the murder of civilians who are related to suspected terrorists even though those are war crimes.

He says he doesn't have to listen to our generals or our admirals, our ambassadors and other high officials, because he has quote "a very good brain."

He also said, "I know more about ISIS than the generals do, believe me." You know what? I don't believe him.

He says climate change is a hoax invented by the Chinese, and he has the gall to say that prisoners of war like John McCain aren't heroes.

He praises dictators like Vladimir Putin and picks fights with our friends including the British prime minister, the mayor of London, the German chancellor, the president of Mexico and the pope.

He says he has foreign policy experience because he ran the Miss Universe pageant in Russia.

And to top it off, he believes America is weak. An embarrassment. He called our military a disaster. He said we are and I quote a "third-world country." And he's been saying things like that for decades.

Those are the words my friends of someone who doesn't understand America or the world.

And they're the words of someone who would lead us in the wrong direction. Because if you really believe America is weak with our military, our values, our capabilities that no other country comes close to matching hen you don't know America.

And you certainly don't deserve to lead it.

That's why even if I weren't in this race I'd be doing everything I could to make sure Donald Trump never becomes president because I believe he will take our country down a truly dangerous path.

Unlike him, I have some experience with the tough calls and the hard work of statecraft. I wrestled with the Chinese over a climate deal in Copenhagen, brokered a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas, negotiated the reduction of nuclear weapons with Russia, twisted arms to bring the world together in global sanctions against Iran, and stood up for the rights of women, religious minorities and LGBT people around the world.

And I have, I have sat in the Situation Room and advised the President on some of the toughest choices he faced.

So I'm not new to this work. And I'm proud to run on my record, because I think the choice before the American people in this election is clear.

I believe in strong alliances; clarity in dealing with our rivals; and a rock-solid commitment to the values that have always made America great. And I believe with all my heart that America is an exceptional country that we're still, in Lincoln's words, the last, best hope of earth. We are not a country that cowers behind walls. We lead with purpose, and we prevail.

And if America doesn't lead, we leave a vacuum and that will either cause chaos, or other countries will rush in to fill the void. Then they'll be the ones making the decisions about your lives and jobs and safety and trust me, the choices they make will not be to our benefit.

That is not an outcome we can live with.

As I see it, there are some important things our next president must do to secure American leadership and keep us safe and our economy growing in the years ahead. These are all areas in which Donald Trump and I profoundly disagree. And they are all critical to our future.

First, we need to be strong at home.

That means investing in our infrastructure, education and innovation the fundamentals of a strong economy. We need to reduce income inequality, because our country can't lead effectively when so many are struggling to provide the basics for their families. And we need to break down the barriers that hold Americans back, including barriers of bigotry and discrimination.

Compare that with what Trump wants to do. His economic plans would add more than $30 trillion that's trillion with a "t" $30 trillion to our national debt over the next 20 years. He has no ideas on education. No ideas on innovation. He has a lot of ideas about who to blame, but no clue about what to do.

None of what Donald Trump is offering will make America stronger at home. And that would make us weaker in the world.

Second, we need to stick with our allies.

America's network of allies is part of what makes us exceptional. And our allies deliver for us every day.

Our armed forces fight terrorists together; our diplomats work side by side. Allies provide staging areas for our military, so we can respond quickly to events on the other side of the world. And they share intelligence that helps us identify and defuse potential threats.

Take the threat posed by North Korea perhaps the most repressive regime on the planet, run by a sadistic dictator who wants to develop long-range missiles that could carry a nuclear weapon to the United States.

When I was secretary of state, we worked closely with our allies Japan and South Korea to respond to this threat, including by creating a missile defense system that stands ready to shoot down a North Korean warhead, should its leaders ever be reckless enough to launch one at us. The technology is ours. Key parts of it are located on Japanese ships. All three countries contributed to it. And this month, all three of our militaries will run a joint drill to test it.

That's the power of allies.

And it's the legacy of American troops who fought and died to secure those bonds, because they knew we were safer with friends and partners.

Now Moscow and Beijing are deeply envious of our alliances around the world, because they have nothing to match them. They'd love for us to elect a president who would jeopardize that source of strength. If Donald gets his way, they'll be celebrating in the Kremlin. We cannot let that happen.

That's why it is no small thing when he talks about leaving NATO, or says he'll stay neutral on Israel's security.

It's no small thing when he calls Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers. We're lucky to have two friendly neighbors on our land borders. Why would he want to make one of them an enemy?

And it's no small thing when he suggests that America should withdraw our military support for Japan, encourage them to get nuclear weapons, and said this about a war between Japan and North Korea and I quote "If they do, they do. Good luck, enjoy yourself, folks."

I wonder if he even realizes he's talking about nuclear war.

Yes, our friends need to contribute their fair share. I made that point long before Donald Trump came onto the scene and a number of them have increased their defense spending. The real debate here is whether we keep these alliances strong or cut them off. What he says would weaken our country.

Third, we need to embrace all the tools of American power, especially diplomacy and development, to be on the frontlines solving problems before they threaten us at home.

Diplomacy is often the only way to avoid a conflict that could end up exacting a much greater cost. It takes patience, persistence and an eye on the long game but it's worth it.

Take the nuclear agreement with Iran. When President Obama took office, Iran was racing toward a nuclear bomb. Some called for military action. But that could have ignited a broader war that could have mired our troops in another Middle Eastern conflict.

President Obama chose a different path. And I got to work leading the effort to impose crippling global sanctions. We brought Iran to the table. We began talks. And eventually, we reached an agreement that should block every path for Iran to get a nuclear weapon.

Now we must enforce that deal vigorously. And as I've said many times before, our approach must be "distrust and verify." The world must understand that the United States will act decisively if necessary, including with military action, to stop Iran from getting a nuclear weapon. In particular, Israel's security is non-negotiable. They're our closest ally in the region, and we have a moral obligation to defend them.

But there is no question that the world and the United States, we are safer now than we were before this agreement. And we accomplished it without firing a single shot, dropping a single bomb or putting a single American soldier in harm's way.

Donald Trump says we shouldn't have done the deal. We should have walked away. But that would have meant no more global sanctions, and Iran resuming their nuclear program and the world blaming us. So then what? War? Telling the world, good luck, you deal with Iran?

Of course Trump doesn't have answers to those questions. Donald Trump doesn't know the first thing about Iran or its nuclear program. Ask him. It'll become very clear, very quickly.

There's no risk of people losing their lives if you blow up a golf-course deal.

But it doesn't work like that in world affairs. Just like being interviewed on the same episode of "60 Minutes" as Putin was, is not the same thing as actually dealing with Putin.

So the stakes in global statecraft are infinitely higher and more complex than in the world of luxury hotels. We all know the tools Donald Trump brings to the table bragging, mocking, composing nasty tweets I'm willing to bet he's writing a few right now.

But those tools won't do the trick. Rather than solving global crises, he would create new ones.

He has no sense of what it takes to deal with multiple countries with competing interests and reaching a solution that everyone can get behind. In fact, he is downright contemptuous of that work. And that means he's much more likely to end up leading us into conflict.

Fourth, we need to be firm but wise with our rivals.

Countries like Russia and China often work against us. Beijing dumps cheap steel in our markets. That hurts American workers. Moscow has taken aggressive military action in Ukraine, right on NATO's doorstep. Now I've gone toe-to-toe with Russia and China, and many other different leaders around the world. So I know we have to be able to both stand our ground when we must, and find common ground when we can.

That's how I could work with Russia to conclude the New START treaty to reduce nuclear stockpiles, and with China to increase pressure on North Korea. It's how our diplomats negotiated the landmark agreement on climate change, which Trump now wants to rip up.

The key was never forgetting who we were dealing with not friends or allies, but countries that share some common interests with us amid many disagreements.

Donald doesn't see the complexity. He wants to start a trade war with China. And I understand a lot of Americans have concerns about our trade agreements I do too. But a trade war is something very different. We went down that road in the 1930s. It made the Great Depression longer and more painful. Combine that with his comments about defaulting on our debt, and it's not hard to see how a Trump presidency could lead to a global economic crisis.

And I have to say, I don't understand Donald's bizarre fascination with dictators and strongmen who have no love for America. He praised China for the Tiananmen Square massacre; he said it showed strength. He said, "You've got to give Kim Jong Un credit" for taking over North Korea something he did by murdering everyone he saw as a threat, including his own uncle, which Donald described gleefully, like he was recapping an action movie. And he said if he were grading Vladimir Putin as a leader, he'd give him an A.

Now, I'll leave it to the psychiatrists to explain his affection for tyrants.

I just wonder how anyone could be so wrong about who America's real friends are. Because it matters. If you don't know exactly who you're dealing with, men like Putin will eat your lunch.

Fifth, we need a real plan for confronting terrorists.

As we saw six months ago in San Bernardino, the threat is real and urgent. Over the past year, I've laid out my plans for defeating ISIS.

We need to take out their strongholds in Iraq and Syria by intensifying the air campaign and stepping up our support for Arab and Kurdish forces on the ground. We need to keep pursuing diplomacy to end Syria's civil war and close Iraq's sectarian divide, because those conflicts are keeping ISIS alive. We need to lash up with our allies, and ensure our intelligence services are working hand-in-hand to dismantle the global network that supplies money, arms, propaganda and fighters to the terrorists. We need to win the battle in cyberspace.

And of course we need to strengthen our defenses here at home.

That in a nutshell is my plan for defeating ISIS.

What's Trump's? Well he won't say. He is literally keeping it a secret. The secret, of course, is he has no idea what he'd do to stop ISIS.

Just look at the few things he's actually said on the subject.

He's actually said and I quote "maybe Syria should be a free zone for ISIS." Oh, okay let a terrorist group have control of a major country in the Middle East.

Then he said we should send tens of thousands of American ground troops to the Middle East to fight ISIS.

He also refused to rule out using nuclear weapons against ISIS, which would mean mass civilian casualties.

It's clear he doesn't have a clue what he's talking about. So we can't be certain which of these things he would do. But we can be certain that he's capable of doing any or all of them. Letting ISIS run wild. Launching a nuclear attack. Starting a ground war. These are all distinct possibilities with Donald Trump in charge.

And through all his loose talk, there's one constant theme: demonizing Muslims and playing right into the hands of ISIS'. His proposal to ban 1.5 billion Muslims from even coming to our country doesn't just violate the religious freedom our country was founded on. It's also a huge propaganda victory for ISIS. And it alienates the very countries we need to actually help us in this fight.

A Trump presidency would embolden ISIS. We cannot take that risk.

This isn't reality television this is actual reality.

And defeating global terrorist networks and protecting the homeland takes more than empty talk and a handful of slogans. It takes a real plan, real experience, and real leadership. Donald Trump lacks all three.

And one more thing. A president has a sacred responsibility to send our troops into battle only if we absolutely must, and only with a clear and well-thought-out strategy. Our troops give their all. They deserve a Commander-in-Chief who knows that.

I've worked side-by-side with admirals and generals, and visited our troops in theaters of war. I've fought for better health care for our National Guard, better services for our veterans, and more support for our Gold Star families. We cannot put the lives of our young men and women in uniform in Donald Trump's hands.

Sixth, we need to stay true to our values.

Trump says over and over again, "The world is laughing at us." He's been saying this for decades, he didn't just start this year. He bought full-page ads in newspapers across the country back in 1987, when Ronald Reagan was president, saying that America lacked a backbone and the world was you guessed it laughing at us. He was wrong then, and he's wrong now and you've got to wonder why somebody who fundamentally has so little confidence in America, and has felt that way for at least 30 years, wants to be our president.

The truth is, there's not a country in the world that can rival us. It's not just that we have the greatest military, or that our economy is larger, more durable, more entrepreneurial than any in the world. It's also that Americans work harder, dream bigger and we never, ever stop trying to make our country and world a better place.

So it really matters that Donald Trump says things that go against our deepest-held values. It matters when he says he'll order our military to murder the families of suspected terrorists. During the raid to kill bin Laden, when every second counted, our SEALs took the time to move the women and children in the compound to safety. Donald Trump may not get it, but that's what honor looks like.

And it also matters when he makes fun of people with disabilities, calls women pigs, proposes banning an entire religion from our country, or plays coy with white supremacists. America stands up to countries that treat women like animals, or people of different races, religions or ethnicities as less human.

What happens to the moral example we set for the world and for our own children if our president engages in bigotry?

And by the way, Mr. Trump every time you insult American Muslims or Mexican immigrants, remember that plenty of Muslims and immigrants serve and fight in our armed forces.

Donald Trump, Donald Trump could learn something from them.

That brings me to the final point I want to make today the temperament it takes to be Commander-in-Chief.

Every president faces hard choices every day, with imperfect information and conflicting imperatives. That's the job.

A revolution threatens to topple a government in a key region, an adversary reaches out for the first time in years what do you do?

Making the right call takes a cool head and respect for the facts. It takes a willingness to listen to other people's points of view with a truly open mind. It also takes humility knowing you don't know everything because if you're convinced you're always right, you'll never ask yourself the hard questions.

I remember being in the Situation Room with President Obama, debating the potential Bin Laden operation. The President's advisers were divided. The intelligence was compelling but far from definitive. The risks of failure were daunting. The stakes were significant for our battle against al Qaeda and our relationship with Pakistan. Most of all, the lives of those brave SEALs and helicopter pilots hung in the balance.

It was a decision only the president could make. And when he did, it was as crisp and courageous a display of leadership as I've ever seen.

Now imagine Donald Trump sitting in the Situation Room, making life-or-death decisions on behalf of the United States. Imagine him deciding whether to send your spouses or children into battle. Imagine if he had not just his Twitter account at his disposal when he's angry, but America's entire arsenal.

Do we want him making those calls someone thin-skinned and quick to anger, who lashes out at the smallest criticism? Do we want his finger anywhere near the button?

I have a lot of faith that the American people will make the right decision. This is a country with a deep reservoir of common sense and national pride. We're all counting on that.

Because making Donald Trump our Commander-in-Chief would be a historic mistake. It would undo so much of the work that Republicans and Democrats alike have done over many decades to make America stronger and more secure. It would set back our standing in the world more than anything in recent memory. And it would fuel an ugly narrative about who we are that we're fearful, not confident; that we want to let others determine our future for us, instead of shaping our own destiny.

That's not the America I know and love.

So yes, we have a lot of work to do to keep our country secure. And we need to do better by American families and American workers and we will. But don't let anyone tell you that America isn't great. Donald Trump's got America all wrong. We are a big-hearted, fair-minded country.

There is no challenge we can't meet, no goal we can't achieve when we each do our part and come together as one nation.

Every lesson from our history teaches us that we are stronger together. We remember that every Memorial Day.

This election is a choice between two very different visions of America.

One that's angry, afraid, and based on the idea that America is fundamentally weak and in decline.

The other is hopeful, generous, and confident in the knowledge that America is great just like we always have been.

Let's resolve that we can be greater still. That is what I believe in my heart.

I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state. And I never lost my sense of pride at seeing our blue-and-white plane lit up on some far-off runway, with "The United States of America" emblazoned on the side. That plane those words our country represents something special, not just to us, to the world. It represents freedom and hope and opportunity.

I love this country and I know you do too. It's been an honor and a privilege to serve America and I'm going to do everything I can to protect our nation, and make sure we don't lose sight of how strong we really are.

Thank you all very much.

In California, Hillary Clinton called out Donald Trump for his $25 billion plan to build a wall along the border, and for his pledge to deport 11 million people from our country. Hillary will move our country forward by investing in 21st century infrastructure, not by building useless walls and dividing us. During her remarks, she laid out her plan to make the boldest investments in our infrastructure since President Eisenhower built the interstate highway and vowed to introduce her infrastructure proposal in her first 100 days in office as part of a package to connect American workers with opportunity and create the good-paying jobs of the future.

Hey, it is great to be here with all of you, and I am thrilled to be in Orange County. I've got to tell you--I've got to tell you, it was a treat to be introduced by Jamie Lee Curtis. I am thrilled that she is here with us, and I really did like A Fish Called Wanda, and Freaky Friday.

But I like her enthusiasm, her energy, her heart. And I'm so pleased, too, to be here with my longtime friend, someone who is--I'm going to put this back in here. It's clearly--it's okay. It's okay. That's fine. We don't mind. We don't mind. Because you got everybody all revved up. But I want to also thank my friend, my former colleague, both in the Congress and in President Obama's cabinet, Hilda Solis. Hilda has been a Congresswoman, the Secretary of Labor, and is now LA County Supervisor. And in every job she's had, she has performed magnificently, and helped so many people. And she's a dear, dear friend of mine.

Now, we are here at the home of the UFCW Local 324. I want to thank Greg Conger and Rick Eiden and Greg  for welcoming us here, and all of the UFCW family. And thank Andrea Zinder for appearing on the free program. Thanks also to Art Brown and everybody from Buena Park who has made us so welcome.

And mostly, I want to thank all of you. One of the great things about campaigning across the country is to stand where I'm standing and look out at this audience and audiences like it, and really see America. Seeing what we are as a nation--I have this old-fashioned idea that we are stronger together. Stronger together when we make the economy work for everybody, not just those at the top. Stronger together when we knock down all the barriers that stand in the way of any American getting ahead and staying ahead.

And I love all of you too. So you know what's at stake in this election, because here you are. You understand, we have a big a choice. As you just heard from Jamie Lee, this is a point in our history where there are not just one, but several hinges here at home and around the world. The decisions we make, who we are as a people, whether we're going to continue moving forward together or we're going to build walls instead of bridges.

We have decisions to make. And I've talked a lot in this campaign about what's at stake, and I'm going to continue talking about it, because I don't want anybody to be surprised.

When people run for office and they tell you what they want to do, you should believe them. One of my great friends, and one of our great American icons, Maya Angelo, said, when somebody shows you who they are, believe them. And that's why I've gone across the country now for more than a year, ending up here in California. Talking about what kind of country I want for all of us, not just some of us. A country where we are creating more good jobs with rising incomes. A country where we are not only growing the economy, but making it fairer by raising the minimum wage, and guaranteeing equal pay for women's work. A country where an education system works for everybody, starting with early childhood education so every single child can be better prepared to succeed.

 We have a big decision in the selection. And it does have to do with the economy. It is a historic fact, our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House. And we don't have to go back 100 years. Let's just go back 25. When my husband was president, we had 23 million more jobs. Incomes went up for everybody, not just people at the top. That's what we want again. During those 8 years, median family income went up 17 percent. Median African family income went up 33 percent. We were all rising together. We lifted more people out of poverty. We ended up with a balanced budget and a surplus. We were on the right track, my friends. And what happened? The Republicans got the White House back.

Now, look, they do have--they do have a point of view. I know and respect, they are consistent. Consistently wrong, but they are consistent. They believe that if you just keep cutting taxes on the wealthiest, it will all trickle down. So they did. They took a machete to the tax system and cut taxes on the wealthy. They took their eyes off the financial markets and the mortgage markets. And we know what happened. And California was especially hard hit. 9 million Americans lost their jobs. 5 million homes were lost. And we could have had a Great Depression, not just a Great Recession. Anybody who thinks back to how scary those times were knows that. And I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch the Republicans dropped us into.

So listen carefully. Because when Donald Trump talks about the economy, he is talking about trickle down on steroids. He has put forth an economic plan that is by a billionaire, for billionaires. And it is going to hurt a lot of people. He doesn't seem to actually care about making America great so much as he seems to care about making himself look great. And here's what I want you to know. Because I bet everybody in here knows somebody or knows somebody who knows somebody who lost their home. Right? And I want you to know that Donald Trump actually rooted for the housing crash that caused 5 million families their homes. I'm not making this up. We called him out on it yesterday using his own words. And you know what he said in response? He bragged about what he did. He said, and I'm quoting now, "That's the kind of thinking our country needs."

He said, profiting off of working people losing their homes would be a quote, "Good result." So a good result in Donald Trump's world is he gets his, and you get hurt. So instead of dividing Americans, we need to unite Americans. And one of the ways I'm going to do that is by promoting more infrastructure jobs, because the state of our infrastructure is a national emergency. We have bridges that are right now too dangerous to drive on, although people take a deep breath and drive across them. We have roads that are so riddled and pitted and potholed that people driving them are having to pay hundreds of dollars to repair the damage. We have airports that are stuck in the mid-20th century instead of the 21st century. We have water systems that are unsafe for children to drink the water from.

So we have to rebuild the infrastructure we have, and we have to build a stronger future together because every community in our country, every single one of them, deserves clean water, clean air, clean energy, and think of the millions of people we can put to work, including some of those laborers right down there in the front.

Every kid in our country deserves a good school with a good teacher--no matter what ZIP code that child lives in. So we're going to make investments that will put people to work, will fix the infrastructure, including a lot of our schools that are literally falling down around our students and teachers. I have visited schools, my friends, that are filled with mold, ceiling tiles falling down, water damage everywhere  in America. That's exactly right. That is wrong, and we're going to put people to work fixing our schools as well as everything else.

And I want you to compare this. See, I want to fix our schools, our bridges, our roads, our ports, our airports, our water systems. Donald Trump wants to build a wall. A great big wall, as he says. A huge wall. And he says he's going to make Mexico pay for it.

Now, the best estimates I have seen is that this wall would cost, oh, at least $25 billion. That is enough to build 16 Golden Gate Bridges or 1,500 new elementary schools. It is enough to send more than 300,000 veterans to college--or install enough renewable energy to power 5 million homes. We sure could help a lot of hardworking Americans if we took that money and invested it here and made a real difference in the lives and the jobs and the schools and the opportunities that Americans have.

So we have a real choice in this election. And, of course, you know one of the biggest choices is about immigration. I support comprehensive immigration reform as a path to citizenship. I have said in my first 100 days I will send a plan to Congress. We will still working immediately because I want us to get this issue behind us.

And, you see, I have this I guess old-fashioned idea that if we do comprehensive immigration reform, and we invest in infrastructure, the biggest infrastructure investment since Dwight Eisenhower built the interstate highway system--we are going to have more than enough jobs for everybody. That is what we want in America because I want everybody to have jobs with purpose and dignity. And I want incomes to start going up again, the way they did in the 1990s. I want people to get the raise for their hard work. I want more companies--and I've got a plan to incentivize this--I want more companies to share their profits with their workers, not just their CEOs.

I also believe that we can make investments in advanced manufacturing, and one of the best areas for that is fighting climate change. Climate change is real. It is not a Chinese hoax, like Donald Trump says. It is affecting parts of our country right now. You can look at villages in Alaska that are being battered and some people being forced to move. You can go to Miami and on sunny afternoons you can see daylight flooding because the tide is so high. You can see the results right now.

Now, this can either be something that we wring our hands over and ignore, or something we say, you know, not only is it important we do this, but we can create a lot of jobs. Some country is going to be the 21st century clean energy superpower. I think it is going to be China, Germany, or us. I intend for it to be us. I intend for it to be us.

I have a plan to install a half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term--and enough clean renewable energy to power every home by the end of my second term. And these are jobs that can't be exported; they've got to be done right here in California and across America.

You see, I am tired of people running for president who just do nothing but criticize America. I am tired of people who are so negative about our country. Do we have problems? Well, of course we have problems. If you've been alive longer than an hour, you've got a problem. I speak from experience.

So what do Americans do? Do we either power down and moan and groan about how bad things are? Or do we make promises we can't keep and get people even more frustrated and angry? Or do we roll up our sleeves and get to work? I have no doubt that we are going to create the jobs of the future, enough jobs that people who do their part and work hard are going to be able to get ahead and stay ahead. I have no doubt that we are going to have an education system that provides the skills and the training that our young people and our not-so-young people need, because the job market is so churning people need to get new skills from time to time. Now, you could say, "Well, I don't want to get any new skills; I want to keep doing the job I did 30 years ago." We are not living in the world of 30 years ago. We have all got to pull together. We are stronger together.

So starting with early childhood education, going into elementary and secondary education, where I want to be a good partner with the teachers of America, not pointing fingers and scapegoating them. Getting more technical education available to high school students, so that they can get the skills that will make them employable in the job market. Making community college free, so that everybody--who wants to continue or come back and acquire skills can do so. I want to make college affordable.

I want to work to help you pay down your debt, so that you are not crippled by it. We can do all of this. We know how to do it.

Because we're here in a union hall, I want to say a special word about the great work unions do with apprenticeship programs. I want more businesses to work with unions to do more apprenticeship training, and I want more businesses to start their own apprenticeship training. I am willing to give them a tax credit in order to train young people to be able to do the jobs that are needed today. We have to do a better job linking up people with where jobs are available. We can do this. We can make this happen.

And then, when it comes to healthcare because, think about it, what are the three things that keep you up at night? Jobs, education costs, training skills, and healthcare. I will continue to improve the Affordable Care Act. I will work to get the costs down, premiums, co-pays, deductibles, prescription drug costs. Before there was something called Obamacare, there was something called Hillarycare. And, you know, I had to work--I had to work really hard to get this done, and we didn't. But then I turned around and created the Children's Health Insurance Program--which insures 8 million kids. So we made progress, but I was thrilled when President Obama passed and signed the Affordable Care Act.

And I meet somebody every week around the country, often as I shake hands after an event like this, who says, "Thank you for defending the Affordable Care Act. I don't know what my family would have done without it. Thank you, because I didn't have insurance. I worked, but I didn't have insurance. I finally got it, I went to the doctor, I found out I was sick, but I'm going to be okay because I got there in time."

So when somebody like Donald Trump or other Republican says, "Hey, we're going to shut down the Affordable Care Act," and don't tell you what they would substitute for it, be wary, because they want to go back to the insurance companies calling the shots, so that people with preexisting conditions, like being human--wouldn't be able to afford their health insurance. So we do have to make improvements in the Affordable Care Act, but we're going to continue our march toward universal healthcare coverage in America.

And there are two areas where we don't pay enough attention, and I'm serious about this: mental health and addiction. We have too many people who are suffering from one or both. We have too many people going to jail or prison because of one or both. We still have a stigma about mental health, don't we? If you have diabetes, you tell people. If you have depression, you worry, what will they think of you if you tell them? The more we are learning about how our bodies work and our genetic makeup, and all of that, we have to treat all health problems, whether they are above or below your neck, the same way. People deserve to get the medical care they need. And when it comes to addiction, we need much more treatment and recovery, and diversion from the criminal justice system to help people who are addicted.

So we've got work to do that will bring us together, not divide us. And that may be as important as anything to getting the work done. You see, I think there are three big tests that anybody asking for your vote should meet. Number one, can you produce positive results for somebody? And as Jamie Lee said, what is your track record doing that? Have you helped other people? Have you made a difference in their lives? Have you lifted up the concerns that people have and tried to work with them, so that they could break down the barriers that stood in their way? That's why I have been specific about what I would do because I want you to hold me accountable. I'm not going to just stand up here and give you platitudes and rhetoric. I'm going to tell you what I want to do because I need you to be part of how we do it together.

And the second big task is, when you vote in the California primary, when you vote in November, you're voting for the commander in chief as well as the President, right? And here is where I'm especially concerned about Donald Trump.

You know, just in the last few weeks, he's attacked our closest ally, Britain; he has praised the dangerous dictator of North Korea--he has advocated pulling out of NATO, our strongest military alliance; he has suggested it's okay with him if more countries get nuclear weapons. He's even gone so far as to say, well, maybe he would use nuclear weapons against ISIS, which is not even a state. He has said we should return to torture, and he wants to ban all Muslims from coming into our country--a country founded on religious freedom. I mean, and that's just the beginning.

Picking fights with everybody? Pointing fingers and scapegoating? That may be good for reality TV, but when you are the President of the United States, you don't say to heads of government--in fact, you don't even say to Senators and Members of Congress--"you're fired." They'd look at you like you were crazy. You've got to work with people. You've got to make everybody feel that they've got a stake in solving the problem.

Let me give you a quick couple of examples. All this loose talk about Muslims, it's not just heard in the United States, it's heard around the world. And I said months ago, what Donald Trump is saying is going to be used to recruit terrorists by ISIS. I knew it was already going on but that wasn't public yet, so they said, "Oh, no, no that can't be."

Well now, just recently, we have absolute evidence--oh, yes it is. They're taking his words out of his mouth, denigrating Muslims, and putting them into propaganda videos. Why are we making the world more dangerous for Americans? For our friends and our allies and partners around the world?

When I was secretary of state, I was in Cambodia in November 2012. And I got a phone call from the Israeli government saying Hamas, the terrorist group that's next door in Gaza, is shooting missiles again into Israel, and we've tried to talk to people to get them to stop but if they don't stop, we're going to have to invade to stop them. I said, "Wait a minute, I'll be right there."

That's the kind of thing you can say when you're secretary of state, right? You get on a plane, and you fly all night, and you end up in Tel Aviv, and then you get in an armored car, and you drive to Jerusalem. And then I began dealing with the Israeli security cabinet.

And they were saying, the Middle East has changed so much because of the so-called Arab Spring; we don't know who to talk to. We keep trying to reach out to have somebody say, you've got to stop this, and the most likely person to be able to do that is the then-President of Egypt, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood; a man by the name of Morsi. I said, "Okay, well let's talk through what we want, what is the best outcome, and I will fly to Cairo and negotiate with President Morsi."

And we did and I did.

And I want you to think about, here's a guy who's the president of Egypt − not just a Muslim, but a member of the Muslim Brotherhood − and I'm trying to negotiate a cease fire to prevent another war. My life would have been miserable, and I'm not sure we would have gotten it done, if we'd had the kind of language, the rhetoric, being used about Muslims coming from somebody running for President of the United States--or heaven forbid, being President of the United States.

So these words have consequences. You know? The reality show doesn't end and the new show come on. People remember. They listen. And the decisions that get to the situation room in the White House are the hardest decisions. If they weren't hard, somebody would have decided them as they came up the ladder. Hilda was in the cabinet, she knows that; she made a lot of tough calls on behalf of labor rules and regulations. And she could make most of them but if they were particularly contentious, she had to go to the White House and they had to have a meeting about it. Well, the same with foreign policy and national security.

So I was one of the small group of people asked to advise the President about whether the intelligence we had was strong enough about where maybe Bin Laden was to take action. And I had a particular personal interest in this because I was a senator from New York on 9/11. And I went--I was at Ground Zero 24 hours after we were attacked. I saw what as the closest I hope I ever come to seeing hell. I just can't even tell you. Even think about it now just upsets me. Standing on the street where there was a black cloud of dust, and toxins, and a horrible wall, and through the wall were breaking fire fighters dragging their axes after having been on the pile 24 hours trying to find somebody alive. Iron workers and other construction trade workers, labor workers, and the like dropped what they were doing and rushed to be helpful--rushing toward danger. So I took the hunt for Bin Laden personally on behalf of the 3,000 people, many of them my constituent's families.

So when we began to evaluate that evidence, it was − there's no flashing light which says, "He's here, he's here, go get him."

You look at it, you evaluate it, you get more information, you ask skeptical people to take a look at it, you talk to the Military about what the options are. And then at the end, the President asked every one of us in that room what we thought he should do. And people who I deeply respect, we disagreed. Some people said, "You know what, the intelligence is not strong enough, we can't take the risk." Others said, "Well, it's strong but probably not strong enough, but I think we could launch a missile and take out the compound."

And then others, including myself, said we would never know if we got Bin Laden, we have to send in a SEAL team.

And at the end of that conversation, this is my point, even the President's advisors--secretary of state, secretary of defense, head of the CIA, head of the Joint Chiefs of the military--the president has to make the decision. And President Obama, who is a thoughtful, deliberative decision maker--you can agree or disagree--but he studies it, he thinks about it, and he tries to make a logical, responsible decision. And he said he was going to retire, and he was going to review it all, and make his decision. Now, he made the decision to send in the SEAL team and we did bring Bin Laden to justice.

It all comes down to who the president is. It all comes down to how thoughtful, careful, experienced the president is. And this will be a big part of the election this year because we live in a dangerous world. We have a lot of people who are out there making it their business to disrupt the world, to disrupt Europe, the Middle East, America, to cause problems like that dictator in North Korea. We need a steady, strong hand in order to make the best decisions.

And the final test is will the President unify us or further divide us? I see a lot of evidence that Donald Trump is a divider, not a uniter. I don't know whether it makes him feel good to insult people; I don't understand the motivation. He's insulted immigrants, he makes a habit of insulting women. Last night he insulted the Republican Governor Martinez of New Mexico, gratuitously. I don't know, he seems to have something about women. I don't know.

I do love--one of my favorite Trump comments in the last couple of weeks is, he does have foreign policy experience dealing with Russia because he staged the Miss Universe Pageant in Moscow. That was a particular favorite.

Regardless of why he says what he says, insulting John McCain's war heroism, insulting a person with disabilities, obviously denigrating Muslims, whatever reason he does it, it is setting Americans against Americans. It is a recipe for more divisiveness at a time where we must be united, and where I believe Americans want us to get things done that will actually help them and help our country, strengthen our economy, create better opportunities. And remember I said, when somebody tells you what they do believe in? Think of what he has said about our rights.

So here's where I stand. I will defend a woman's right to make their own ... decisions. I will defend Planned Parenthood against these ... . I will defend marriage equality and end discrimination against the LGBT community. I will defend voters' rights, which are under attack from North Carolina to Texas, and I will appoint Supreme Court Justices who will overturn ... . I will protect the right to organize and bargain collectively, and be a member of a union. And I will take on the gun lobby to get common sense gun safety ... .

But I can't do any of this without your help. You know that this primary in California on June 7th is really important because California is always about the future. California is where the future starts in America. So I need you, if you can, vote my mail--some of you already have. Be sure to vote on June 7th, bring your friends, bring your colleagues, your family members. Because I promise you this, if you go and vote for me in this primary, I will stand up and fight for you and fight for the country we love, and fight for the future we deserve. Let's go out and win the future. Thank you.

Hillary Clinton addressed Service Employees International Union (SEIU) members at their 2016 International Convention in Detroit. She discussed why there is so much at stake for working families in this election: From fighting to raise the minimum wage to protecting the right to organize, American workers need a president who is on their side, not one that has taken aim at them.

In addition, she reiterated her commitment to introducing comprehensive immigration reform in the first 100 days in office and building on President Obama's executive actions in order to keep families together. Hillary also warned of the consequences of a Donald Trump presidency that would deport 11 million immigrants and tear hardworking families apart. She emphasized that the stakes couldn't be higher because Donald Trump's vision for America is to send a "deportation force' to schools, workplaces, and homes to round up children, mothers, fathers, and grandparents.

Hello, SEIU!

It is so great to be here as you gather and take Detroit by storm. I am so honored to be here, to congratulate all of you on the incredible progress you continue to make under your president Mary Kay Henry, secretary-treasurer Gerry Hudson, and all of your executive vice presidents.

You know, standing behind me are some of the SEIU members that I've had the great honor of meeting over the past year.

Thank you, Terrell, for sharing your story. I was so touched by what you had to say and the others with whom I met just from Chicago, to L.A. to New Haven and places in between to hear what you do, how you do it, how you love doing it. But how it's becoming impossible to continue the work you love, in childcare or home health care, if you do not have a living wage.

I am here to tell you that I join with you to do everything we can to make sure that the men and women of SEIU who are providing care for our children, our elderly, people with disabilities, you all have a living wage.

I do sort of wish that the presumptive Republican nominee could have been around to hear the stories that I heard. Maybe then he wouldn't say wages are too high in this country. Maybe he would finally open his ears and listen to what working people everywhere are saying that America needs a raise!

I really can't think of a better way to start the week than standing with the brothers and sisters of SEIU. You keep America healthy, care for our loved ones, help people with disabilities live independently. You keep our cities, our states, and our schools running. You clean our buildings, and protect our communities.

So today, I want to say something that I don't think you hear enough: Thank you. Thank you, thank you, thank you.

I know that you are often unsung heroes. And I want you to know this: Your fights are my fights. Just like the theme of this conference says: "Together, we are unstoppable."

I'm thrilled to see so many friends from my home state of New York here today. And friends from across the country who have helped me in this primary campaign. You braved the snow in Iowa and the rain in South Carolina, you've knocked doors in New Hampshire and got on buses to come to Nevada. Everywhere I go these days, the purple t-shirts are out in force. Like a lot of great things about America, this campaign is union-built, and I could not be prouder.

You've had my back--and I will always have yours.

Because as I've traveled the country I've had the chance, really the privilege and talked with health care workers, home care workers, childcare workers, fast food workers, airport workers, and janitors, and nurses. I've heard again and again: There has never been more at stake for working families in America than right now.

This election, my friends, from where I stand is about knocking down all the barriers that hold families and workers back. Building ladders of opportunity in their place. Coming together to get incomes rising and creating more good jobs that provide dignity and pride.

That's what SEIU has always fought for. And with your help, we are going to win in November.

I am the granddaughter of a factory worker who operated a loom at the Scranton Lace Works in Pennsylvania. My father put everything he had into a small fabric printing shop in Chicago. My mother was out on her own working as a housemaid at the age of 14.

I grew up respecting the dignity of hard work and what it takes to provide a good, middle class life, where you really can believe that your children will be better off than you have been.

So that's why I believe that when unions are strong, America is strong. There is no doubt, although some may question it, unions helped build the strongest middle class in the history of the world. SEIU is not only part of that noble tradition, you've been on the frontlines of the fight for affordable health care, safe working conditions, and fair, predictable schedules. And today, you're leading the movement to raise the minimum wage, which will lift 35 million working Americans out of poverty.

In fact, the American labor movement pioneered the basic bargain that made our country great: If you work hard and you do your part, you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead.

You're not just fighting for your members--you're fighting for all working families. And I'm proud to be in the trenches fighting alongside you. Because I also know strong families are the backbone of our economy and our country.

So to everyone here, to all of you who have ever faced a hostile legislature, a union-busting governor, or both: Help is on the way.

We are going to defend the right to organize, protect collective bargaining. Let's make the jobs of the future good union jobs that can't be outsourced. And let's say what we all know: "right to work' is wrong for workers, and wrong for America.

I know that and you know that and it's time we make sure everyone knows that. Because thanks to the determination and sacrifice of working people like you all over this country--and because of the leadership of President Obama--we've worked our way back from the worst financial crisis in a generation. You see, I don't think the President gets the credit he deserves for saving our economy.

But our work is far from finished.

I've heard from so many families who are still struggling. Corporate profits keep going up, and so do everyday living expenses, but paychecks for most people still are not growing the way they should. Too many families worry about how to keep the lights on and the rent paid. Parents run themselves ragged trying to balance responsibilities at home and work.

It can be even harder for parents raising kids with special needs or chronic illnesses. Like LaTonya Allen, a homecare worker I met from Atlanta. Her 29-year-old daughter has cerebral palsy. LaTonya is working around the clock to support her family on $9 an hour. She has no benefits, no vacation, no sick days--so when she got hurt on the job, she went to work on crutches, with a broken bone in her hip.

She is not asking for life to be easy. It ain't no crystal staircase; she knows that. But no one should have to choose between taking care of their health or paying the bills. LaTonya works so hard, she works hard to do right by her family. She deserves a country that will do right by her. That is what's at stake in this election.

Because the families I've met across the country come from different backgrounds, they earn different incomes, but they all desperately want to give their kids a good life. And they're up against pressures and problems too big for them to solve on their own.

In many ways, our economy and our workplaces are built still for a different time, when many moms stayed home, when one parent could earn enough to support a family. Don't you think it's time, finally, that we catch up to how American families actually live and work in today's world? Well I sure do, that's why I have been laying out an agenda and I thank SEIU for helping me with that agenda, Mary Kay.

First, we've got to do more to raise families' incomes. Let's start by raising the federal minimum wage. And let's support local efforts to go even higher. I am proud to stand with SEIU and workers across the country organizing in the fight for $15 and a union. Every worker everywhere in America deserves a fair wage and a voice on the job. So thank you for leading this fight, because "when we fight, we win."

Let's also fight for paid family leave. Too many moms, and a lot of them right here today, too many moms have to go back to work just days after their babies are born--like the homecare worker I met from Minnesota, who had to return a week after having a C-section. How else was she going to put food on the table for a toddler and a new baby? And too many dads and parents of adopted children don't get any paid leave at all. Neither do sons and daughters struggling to take care of their aging parents.

None of this is fair to families. Donald Trump may not care--but we do. And so do working families across our country. We know America is better than this.

So let's finally guarantee equal pay for women. After all, it's 2016. Don't you think it's about time? When a woman is paid unfairly and unequally that doesn't just shortchange her--it shortchanges her whole family.

Let's encourage more employers, both in the private and the public sector, to embrace family-friendly policies, like predictable scheduling.

Together, we'll do whatever we can to fight to finally put quality childcare within the reach of every family.

You know that in many states, childcare is more expensive than rent, it's more expensive even than college tuition. That puts parents in an impossible position.

Just ask Artheta Peters from Cleveland, Ohio. She loves her job caring for an 8-year-old with a muscle disease. But she doesn't earn enough to afford childcare for her own children, so she's forced to leave them at home with an older sibling. It breaks her heart, but she doesn't have a choice.

In fact, in some states, two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend about 20 percent of their income on childcare. For a single parent, it's 40 percent. That is way too high.

Let's make it so no family ever has to spend more than 10 percent of their income for childcare.

And let's give childcare workers a raise. Right now, dog trainers are paid more than childcare workers. Look, I believe in training dogs, but you don't dress your dog up and send your dog to kindergarten, do you? You don't dream of sending your dog to college, do you? You don't worry about whether your dog is going to be exposed to dangerous influences because you can't afford quality childcare, do you? This is crazy, there's nothing more important than our children.

When I sat down with SEIU members in Chicago, I heard one heartbreaking story after another from parents who can't afford to give their own children the care that they give other people's kids every day. So as president I'll support states and cities that take steps to increase pay for childcare providers and early educators, we're going to make childcare more affordable at the same time for families.

I will also launch a Care Workers Initiative across every level of government. Over and over again, homecare and childcare workers that I've met with across the country have told me they want more chances to increase their skills. Let's work together to create more opportunities so that workers who are caring for others can grow in their jobs and fight for fair wages. Let's give them a chance to come together to make their voices heard and we have a stronger, better system for the people who do this vital work.

And if we're serious about doing all of this and supporting families, we have to be serious about facing up to the reality of systemic racism. And that means dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline once and for all.

We have a moral obligation to fight for justice and equity everywhere, and that includes ending, ending the era of mass incarceration, rebuilding the trust between law enforcement and communities, and putting a stop to the horror of young African Americans being killed by or dying in police custody.

We owe that to our children, and we owe it to the parents whose children have been so tragically taken from them.

That's why I'm proud that SEIU members across the country are standing up for criminal justice reform and calling for environmental and economic justice for every community. I will be right by your side, every step of the way.

And there's one more thing that I want you to help on and that is ending the epidemic of gun violence that kills 33,000 Americans a year. We need comprehensive background checks, to close the online loophole, close the gun show loophole, close what's called the Charleston loophole. Stop the unaccountability of gun makers and sellers.

Saturday, Saturday night I was in Fort Lauderdale, with mothers who have lost their children to gun violence, including Trayvon Martin's mother. There were mothers from Chicago and Washington, from New York and Sandy Hook. Mothers joined together, not only in grief and loss, but in courage and resolve. They're going to do everything they can and I am going to help them every way I can. I am committed to doing all we must to help say lives. And I'll tell you right now, the gun lobby doesn't intimidate me and it shouldn't intimidate anybody.

Supporting all families in all ways is a necessity.

And when I talk about families, and what I want to see us do to stay true to our values and give every single person in this country a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. Mr. Trump likes to say I'm playing the "woman card."

Well, you know what I say: if fighting for equal pay, and paid family leave, and raising the minimum wage and affordable childcare, is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

It shouldn't surprise us that he has a very different take on all this. At a time when families are struggling to pay for childcare and so much else, Donald Trump actually stood on a debate stage and argued that Americans are being paid too much. He actually talked, here this because you need to tell your friends, he actually talked about getting rid of the national minimum wage altogether. Shouldn't be surprising, he's hired union-busters to break up organizing campaigns on the properties he owns.

But we're not talking about any ordinary anti-union, anti-worker Republican. A lot of Republicans themselves say Donald Trump is a disaster waiting to happen to America. What little we know of his economic policies would be from running up our debt, to starting trade wars, to letting Wall Street run wild--all of that could cause another crash and devastate working families and our country. Trump economics is a recipe for lower wages, fewer jobs, more debt. He could bankrupt America like he's bankrupted his companies.

Ask yourself, how could anybody lose money running a casino? Really?

And that's not all. I hear every day from families who are afraid of what a Donald Trump presidency would mean for millions of immigrants living and working in America.

16 million people in America are part of what's called "mixed status" families, where some loved ones are citizens and some aren't. Maybe the children were born here but one or both parents are undocumented. I'm sure some of you have families like that. These are not just statistics, are they? We're talking about real people--men, women and children. We're talking about neighbors, coworkers, and friends.

A few months ago in Las Vegas, I met a 10-year-old girl named Karla Ortiz. She started to cry as she told me that her parents had a letter of deportation, and she was scared they would be taken away from her.

In a lot of ways, Karla is a typical, bright fifth grader. She loves science experiments, math, and Charlotte's Web. But she leaves for school every day terrified that her mom and dad who are working hard to support their family, won't be there when she gets home. Her parents had to take her to a heart specialist, who explained that living in constant fear was making her little heart beat dangerously fast.

When Donald Trump talks about deporting 11 million immigrants, he's talking about ripping apart families like Karla's. He's talking about sending a "deportation force" to schools, workplaces, and homes to round up moms, dads, grandparents, even children.

When he talks about ending birthright citizenship, he's talking about kicking children who are born here out of the only country they know.

When he calls immigrants rapists and murderers, he's talking about families like Karla's and many of yours.

The most important measure of any society is how we treat those at the beginning, our children, and those at the end, the elderly. What kind of country would we be if we let Donald Trump rip our families apart?

We have to reject this wrong vision for America with one strong, clear voice. We have to stand up for hardworking American families--and that includes hard-working immigrant families. Moms and dads should be preparing their kids for their futures--not for the possibility that they could be hauled away at any moment.

In my first 100 days as president, I will introduce comprehensive immigration reform. And I will build, I will build on President Obama's executive actions and keep going, fighting every day to fix our broken immigration system and keep families together.

These are just some of the reasons this is one of the most important elections in our lifetimes. The only thing standing between Donald Trump and the Oval Office is all of us.

We are coming to the end of the Democratic primaries. I applaud Senator Sanders and his supporters for challenging us to get unaccountable money out of our politics; we are going to take on the crisis of income inequality. And we are going to unify the Democratic Party and stop Donald Trump.

There is so much more that unites than divides us. And we're going up against a candidate who will pull us backwards on every issue we care about.

We need a president who will use the bully pulpit to stand up for working families--but the last thing we need is a bully in the pulpit.

And nobody knows better than a union like SEIU that the only way to stand up to a bully is together.

That is, that is what I want to do with all of you; it's what unions are about. It's what I've been about my entire life, ever since I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund. We're going to have each other's back. We're going to lift each other up. We're going to leave no one behind. We're going to build a better future not just for yourselves, but for the hardworking people and their children across America. That's how we will be our best.

The lesson of the labor movement, the lesson of America's history, through good times and hard times, is that we are stronger together. So let's keep fighting, let's keep working, let's win an election in November and make sure our country is the country that we know represents our best values, not our worst.

Thank you, and God bless you.

At the 3rd annual Circle of Mothers event hosted by Sybrina Fulton and the Trayvon Martin Foundation, Hillary Clinton addressed about 50 mothers who have lost their children to gun violence and other tragedies. She vowed to continue to fight for gun reforms and ways to reduce violence and prevent incidents that are costing lives in communities all across the country. She also called out Donald Trump for his dangerous ideas that would only hurt families and make our children less safe.

Good evening. What a great honor it is for me to be here with all of you, and to have a chance to see some of the mothers that I've gotten to know over the last months and to meet others of you who are here for this weekend.

I think it's fair to say that the program has already been amazing. Just here during dinner--and I know you had other sessions this weekend--but here during dinner, I have to say that Rebecca Vaughns was just astonishing. And Jill Tracey kept us all in line. I don't know if you could notice where you were sitting, but she has on the coolest-looking red tennis shoes--underneath that elegant, long, flowing black dress. And Queene Thompson Brown spoke to our hearts. Just unleash that, because you have a powerful message.

I want to thank La Vie. I want to thank Minister Wanda Johnson, and Pastor Gregory Williams, and Kat Tynes. Kat Tynes has on the highest high heels I think I've ever seen. I was just knocked over when Kat came up here. They sparkle, but they're like a foot high. I had to give up wearing high heels 10 years ago. I am so jealous.

But the sisterhood that is here is so overwhelming in its love, and I am grateful to see all of you and it in action. I want to thank Sybrina and her entire family, who stand behind her, for bringing us together. Trayvon's parents, Sybrina and Mr. Tracy Martin, and his brother, Jahvaris, and his grandmother--because as Sybrina said, she's from a line of strong women, and I've met Marion Evans, for the first time in South Carolina, and am happy to see her again tonight--have demonstrated what it really means to have a family in the worst of times.

I appreciate the elected officials who are here, including my longtime friend, Congressman Alcee Hastings, who I've known a long, long time. And Barbara Jordan, and Dennis Moss, and Oliver Gilbert, and Dorothy Bendross Mindingall.

But most of all, I thank all the mothers and fathers, but mostly the circle of mothers, who are turning your grief into action, and so importantly, reaching out to support other parents who face the unimaginable.

I've had the great privilege of getting to know Sybrina over the last months. Even before I met her, I knew something important about her. Like a lot of people, I watched--I watched in disbelief and horror--when her son was killed.

But then I saw her talking about her love for Trayvon, urging people who were devastated by his death to make America a more peaceful place. She was joined by Trayvon's father. I can remember seeing that on television. One reporter described them as "models of grace and fortitude."

When I met Sybrina for myself, that's exactly what I saw. It takes a special kind of person to endure a loss like all of you, and then find a way to turn it into service.

That's what Sybrina has done. That's what many of you have done.

Sybrina said, "This is not something I ever wanted to do." She said, "I can't help Trayvon, but there are a lot of other Trayvon Martins I can help."

That's true for all of us. There are a lot of other young men and young women we all can help.

You see, I believe we have a moral obligation to protect our children no matter what ZIP code they live in--to reduce violence, especially gun violence. To stand up against systemic racism and to promote justice and equality. I believe we owe that to our children, and we owe it to the parents who love their children more than anything, especially those whose love persists after they were so tragically taken from them.

Sybrina and I were talking at the table about the weekend that has been provided for the mothers who are here, and I had the great honor of meeting each of the mothers, the "Circle of Mothers," before we came in.

Some lost their children to gun violence.

Others died after encounters with police, or because of domestic violence.

Each mother handed me a letter. Actually, they put it in a basket--put it in a basket that Sybrina's mother, I think, made possible. They handed me that letter, and I'm going to read every single word of these letters, because each of the mothers is telling us something that we all need to hear, not just about their tragedies, but about our country.

Something is wrong when so many young people just starting their lives are dying.

Something is wrong when so many Americans have reason to believe that our country doesn't consider their children as precious and worthy of protection as other children because of the color of their skins.

Something is wrong when so many parents live in fear that their child will be hurt or killed, just for being a young black man in a hooded sweatshirt, like Trayvon; or listening to music in a car, like Jordan Davis, whose mother Lucy is here; or for standing in a park with her friends, like Hadiya Pendleton, whose mother Cleo is here; or simply going to first grade, like Ben Wheeler's mother knows, a student at Sandy Hook Elementary School--Ben's mother Francine is here too.

Something is very wrong, my friends. And this election gives us a chance to keep trying to make it right.

I come here tonight as a mother and a grandmother. I love my daughter and my granddaughter more than anything, and I worry about them like every mother does. I want them always to be safe.

But I also come here as someone who's been fighting for children my entire life. And I'm going to keep talking about these issues every chance I get, because there's nothing more important than protecting our children. If we fail at that, it really doesn't matter what else we get right.

So we have got to face up to all of the barriers that are denying children the opportunities they deserve, that enable people to see some children as less than what they truly are--talented, beautiful, and beloved.

We've got to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline that wrongly diverts too many kids into the criminal justice system. We've even seen an uptick--a significant uptick--in police involvement in school discipline, especially in communities of color. We're seeing an overreliance on suspensions and expulsions. Some of you may remember that video of the girl in South Carolina being thrown out of her desk and dragged across her classroom floor by a school officer. Classrooms should be safe places for all children. That should go without saying.

And yes, we need to continue to fight for criminal justice reform. Our legal system is often stacked against those who have the least power and are the most vulnerable. Let's get back to that fundamental principle: everyone benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law. And this is actually an area where a lot of Democrats and Republicans agree--we need to end the era of mass incarceration; rebuild the bonds of trust between law enforcement and communities; and do something about the horror, the tragedy of too many young African Americans being killed by police or dying in custody.

The mothers of Dontre Hamilton and Eric Garner are here tonight. They, along with Sandy Bland's mother, and so many others across the country, are doing their part to make sure no one else's children die like theirs did.

They deserve our complete and total support.

And we need to protect the health of our children, and that includes their mental health. Nearly 17 million children in America experience mental health problems. Some of those kids don't get treatment. They grow up to adults, and then they cause harm to others. We need to make sure the next generation grows up in a country where there's no shame or stigma, no barriers to anyone seeking and needing mental health care.

And, at long last, we must do something about the gun violence that stalks communities and terrorizes families. This is on the minds of every one of us here tonight as we remember all of the young people who have been lost. This problem isn't going away. Even toddlers are getting their hands on guns and shooting themselves or someone else. There have been, by last count, 23 cases of toddlers getting guns so far this year. I don't know what more evidence anybody needs in our country to know that somebody has gone terribly wrong.

We are smart enough and strong enough as a nation to figure out how to protect the rights of responsible gun owners while keeping guns out of the hands of domestic abusers, other violent criminals, gang members, the severely mentally ill. I know we can do this.

And despite all the political noise, we are actually united on this issue. The vast majority of Americans support comprehensive background checks. In fact, the conservative pollster Frank Luntz found that 82 percent of gun owners and 74 percent of NRA members support background checks for anyone buying a gun. Democrats and Republicans overwhelmingly support them. So do leaders in law enforcement.

So this isn't a matter of building popular support. We already have it. This is a matter of making elected officials do their jobs to keep our children safe.

Now, we know the gun lobby is powerful. I believe it's the most powerful lobby in Washington. And we know that some candidates will say or do anything to keep them happy.

Just yesterday at the NRA's annual convention, Donald Trump said that in his very first hour as president, heaven forbid, he would overturn President Obama's actions to strengthen background checks. Remember, President Obama took those steps after the massacres at Mother Emanuel in Charleston and Sandy Hook Elementary in Newtown, Connecticut.

Then Mr. Trump went further. He said that also on his first day in office, he'd mandate that every school in America allow guns in classrooms. Every school, he said. That idea isn't just way out there, it's dangerous. 33,000 people die from guns every year, nearly 3,000 children and teenagers among them. Parents, teachers, and schools should have the right to keep guns out of classrooms, just like Donald Trump does at many of his hotels, by the way.

This is someone running to be president of the United States of America, a country facing a gun violence epidemic, and he's talking about more guns in our schools. He's talking about more hatred and division in our streets, even about more nuclear weapons in the world. That's no way to keep us safe.

If you want to imagine what Trump's America will look like, picture more kids at risk of violence and bigotry. Picture more anger and fear. Ask any of the mothers here tonight if they want to live in that kind of America. Enough is enough. Unlike Donald Trump, I will not pander to the gun lobby. And we will not be silenced. And we will not be intimidated. As long as children anywhere are being killed by gun violence, we will keep fighting for our kids--because they deserve a president who stands up for them and stands with the mothers here. Their lives are valuable.

Now, there's a lot more I could say tonight about what we need to do to better serve our kids, from education to health care to jobs. But here's the bottom line: Anyone asking for your vote owes it to you to fully grapple with the real challenges facing our families and communities. We owe it to you to listen and come up with solutions--not scapegoats, solutions--that would make a difference in your children's lives.

And to the mothers and fathers who have lost children, we owe you our love, our support, our gratitude, and our promise that we will carry the memories of your sons and daughters in our hearts every day, just like you do.

One of the best experiences of this campaign for me has been getting to know Mothers of the Movement, Sybrina and so many of the other women here tonight. They are turning their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement. I've had the opportunity to sit and listen as they talk about their kids and their families. And I've seen how you gain strength from each other.

That's why tomorrow I hope you will take what you have gotten here this weekend back to your communities, to your families, to your loved ones, because it really does take a village.

It takes a village to raise a child, to protect a child, to mourn a child, and to honor a child. So we've got to stand together and lift each other up and draw strength from each other. Running for president's hard, I got to tell you. But it's nothing like what I have seen the mothers do and what I have learned from every one whom I have met. Your courage and your commitment and your leadership is inspirational to me.

I want to close with a passage from Scripture that means a great deal to me, and I know has meant a great deal to Sybrina.

Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not on your own understanding. In all your ways submit to Him, and He will make your paths straight.

We may never, never be able to understand the senseless violence that has affected the lives in this room and so many others who you are standing for across our country. But there is a path ahead of us. There is work for us to do.

And it is up to us to do that work, and to walk that path, with trust that progress is possible; with love for all our children, no matter their race or background; and with the memory of those we've lost lighting our way toward the future every child in this country deserves.

I am here tonight to say thank you to this circle of mothers, and to say God bless you all and God bless your families. Thank you so very much.

Hillary Clinton continued her "Breaking Down Barriers" tour by outlining her vision to help working families afford the rising costs of child care and health care, saying in Kentucky that taking on these issues is important whether you are Democrat or Republican.

Following events with young parents in Loudoun County, Virginia, and with working moms in Lexington, Kentucky, Hillary visited a family health clinic in Louisville, Kentucky, where she committed to capping family child care costs and expanding home-visiting programs for parents of young children. She again reiterated her belief that we must enact paid family leave, raise the minimum wage and guarantee equal pay.

Well, I, for one, could listen to Bill for a long time. His service along with all of you who have supported this center is really heartening to me because what you've done is what we all know needs to be done--providing comprehensive health care and making sure that people's needs are addressed across the full range of health. And I am thrilled to be here.

I want to recognize former Lieutenant Governor Crit Luallen. Thank you so much for being here, Crit. I also want to recognize former Secretary Audrey Haynes, former Secretary of Health and Human Services here in Kentucky. I am very grateful to them for their service, for being here, but also because they were part of the Beshear administration that did an absolutely world-class job. I don't suppose you need me to say that Kentucky's expansion of Medicaid, the Connect program, was really held up as the best example of any state's efforts. And I know that it was a real team commitment--the entire administration plus all in the health field who were working so hard to make it possible for more people in this beautiful state to have the health insurance that they deserved.

And I want to thank everyone here at Family Health Centers, which serves thousands and thousands of hardworking Kentucky families. I just met some of the people who work here. I met some of the patients. And they're all just beaming--they're so proud to be associated with such a special place. And I am determined to do what I can to help lift up and celebrate organizations like this. Nothing is more important than helping families, particularly hardworking families who need the kind of support that they get here at the Family Health Centers.

And I was thinking and several people as I was walking around were asking me about my granddaughter or they were mentioning that they had met my daughter, and it was just last Sunday that we were celebrating Mother's Day across our country, and a lot of moms were given homemade cards, maybe breakfast in bed, maybe pictures were taken. I've got a whole drawer of gifts like that. And they'll be treasured forever, but it's also important that we recognize that our country should be celebrating families every single day and doing everything we can to support families--not just with nice words but with real actions that can help parents, moms and dads, do the vital work of raising their children, which is the most important work any of us ever do.

And I've heard from thousands of families who are struggling who are trying to figure out how to get from paycheck to paycheck. They can't figure out how to pay for childcare and to put some money away for maybe college someday. They're struggling to be there for their kids, trying to succeed at home, succeed at work, and they're finding how difficult that is--how many stresses are part of it. And for some families it's even greater if they are raising kids with special needs or with chronic illnesses or they have mental health challenges in their families. And in places that have been devastated by job losses not far from here, where coal, steel and rail jobs are disappearing, raising a family becomes even harder.

I was with some moms and dads yesterday in Northern Virginia talking about the challenges that they all face--how to balance work and family--and a few brought their children with them. And we were impressed that all these children were so patient and their moms were keeping them occupied and happy. But it was really important to hear from each of them what they think they need to do the job and how they can get more help.

These moms and dads are running into the middle-class squeeze that many families face. Their relative incomes are the same or lower than they were some years ago, but the cost of everything is higher, so even with two incomes economic pressures are enormous. And one mom said she's paying $16,000 a year for childcare, which means that there's nothing to put away for college, and they're balancing their budget every week trying to make sure they've got the money they need for everything else.

Earlier, in Lexington today, I met with another group of moms and dads at the Family Care Center near the university, and just about every single one of them said how invaluable it was to have a place where they could come to get help to meet the needs of their kids, including childcare, home-visiting programs, medical checkups. That was such a relief, and a lot of them didn't even know that such a program was available until they really needed it and found their way to it. That freed them up to focus on work, knowing that their kids were in safe hands.

I hear this across the country, because so many families really don't know where to turn. And the parents I've met over the past few days and parents that I've met over the past many years may come from different backgrounds, they may earn different incomes. They're Democrats and Republicans, but they're facing the same challenges and they desperately want to give their kids a good life and they are needing help to deal with the pressures, because they can't figure out often how to solve all of this on their own.

So today, even, walking around with Bill, I met parents just very briefly who come here to this center for all of their medical and health needs. It gives them peace of mind, not just services. And that's just something every parent can understand--getting that peace of mind. I know what it was like so many years ago trying to balance family and work, when my daughter would get sick as I was on the way out the door to work, how I would find somebody to help me take care of her because, of course, if she were sick, the babysitter was also sick. And that's the kind of everyday, real challenge that families are facing.

And I want us to be really focused on what we're going to do to make it easier for families to get ahead and stay ahead. And it's going to be one of the major issues that I'm going to keep talking about because I don't think there is anything more important. I know I was lucky all those years ago that I had backup. And I know a lot of parents are trying as hard as they can.

So what can we do to get our economy and our workplaces that were, frankly, built for a different time, when you had a stay-at-home parent, predominately moms, and one income could support a family--but that's just not the way it is for the vast majority of American families any more. And so what we've got to figure out is how to move our family policy into the 21st century and to do more to help women and men find meaningful work, to earn a good living, but to take care of their most important responsibilities.

So I've been thinking a lot about what we can do. How do we make government policies more efficient? How do we make them more responsive to everything that people have to do, to raise their kids and look after the home and be there to earn a living and build a career? Because I don't think we can keep going on like this. We can't keep saying, families just have to buckle down and tighten their belts and figure it out. I think belts are about as tight as they can get for the vast majority of families.

People are using every single hour of their day, and there's still not enough time to get everything done. And too many parents are lying awake at night trying to figure out how in the world they're going to make it all work. So something's got to change, and there isn't one-size-fits-all. We need a menu of options in a country as diverse as ours. And I think there are a number of things we could do that would make real differences for families.

Let's create a national system of paid family leave. Too many new parents really don't know how to handle the family responsibilities. Too many moms have to go right back to work after their babies are born, or they try to cobble together vacation days and sick days and unpaid leave, short-term disability, anything to get more time with their babies. Many don't even get a paid day off to give birth. That's just almost impossible for many people in many workplaces to believe, but it happens to be true. There is no requirement that people get earned sick days, that they get the kind of support that they need. And too many dads and parents of adopted children don't get any paid leave at all, and neither do sons and daughters who are struggling to take care of aging parents. I just don't think this is fair to families, and that we can and should do better.

California's had paid leave for a number of years. They in fact just expanded it to cover more of the pay needed and to cover more family members. And their economy's doing just fine. The arguments we all hear, like, "Oh, my gosh, you can't do that," we will structure a plan that will be sensitive to small businesses with few employees. But we've got to move with the rest of the world, the advanced economies in the world that provide paid leave programs.

I also want to expand home visiting programs nationwide. In some states, nurses, social workers, volunteers who are trained go right into the home. And we heard about a great program in Lexington. They answer questions about nursing or sleep training. They screen for health and developmental benchmarks so problems can be caught early. They emphasize how important it is to talk, read, and sing to your baby to build your baby's brain, which will better prepare your child to succeed in school. Every family deserves that support, no matter where they live. And the testimonials to the home visiting program that I heard in Lexington were just so glowing about what it meant.

I brought a home visiting program for toddlers to Arkansas called the Home Instruction Program for Preschool Youngsters, and it really works. It really helps--not only prepare kids. You know what else it does? It helps parents, predominately mothers and grandmothers, if they are caring for children, feel competent and confident in being that educator in the home that every child needs to have.

We also have to raise families' incomes. Start by raising the minimum wage at the national level, which would give--that would give millions of American families--two-thirds of minimum wage workers are women. So it would give a lot of single-parent families a much-needed boost in their income.

And then of course we have to guarantee equal pay for women's work because when--when a woman is paid unfairly, that doesn't just shortchange her. It shortchanges the whole family. And it hurts them down the road in the form of lower Social Security contributions and retirement savings. And I want to do more to encourage employers to embrace family-friendly policies, and here's just one example.

There are these new sophisticated scheduling software programs that help employers squeeze every last once of productivity out of their workforce. But they also throw their workers' families into chaos. Too many workers don't even know what shift they're working until the last minute. If they have kids, that means they're constantly scrambling to line up childcare. And how can you even plan to take your child to the doctor or go to the parent-teacher's conference or sit down at the dinner table as a family if you are working until 1:00 a.m., and then you're told you have to report back at 4:00 a.m.? And it just infuriates me because I have talked to predominately women who are on these kinds of unpredictable, absolutely back-breaking schedules.

That instability is not what families and kids need. So I want to do more to work with businesses and workers to help workers gain more control over their schedules. We cannot be sacrificing families and children for these unpredictable scheduling choices that are really not necessarily. You cannot convince me that you can't do a little better planning. In fact, if businesses can't, then there's something wrong. They need to get some help themselves because that's not a very smart organizing or managerial approach.

And then we've got to put quality childcare within the reach of every family. Right now, in many states, childcare is more expensive than college tuition. That is just a shocking figure. Now, we know that college is too expensive, and that's why I'm advocating for debt-free college. But for many families, childcare costs are even more, and it puts parents in an impossible position. Either they put their kids in a not-so-great place and spend the whole day worried and distracted, or they do whatever it takes to pay for childcare, even if it means taking on debt; or they decide they just can't afford it, so one parent stays home or they put their child in a setting they're not enthusiastic about.

And I've been talking with so many parents that are just caught in this childcare bind. And if they leave the workforce--predominately, again, the mothers--then it makes it harder to get back in the workforce and to get paid what they should have been paid anyway. And for single-parent families, these choices are even more difficult. So I think we've got a lot to do to make quality childcare affordable for all working families and to move us toward a much more family-friendly set of policies.

I looked it up, and here in Kentucky two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend about 20 percent of their income on childcare. For a single parent, that number goes up to 40 percent. Now, if we're going to say we are for family values, then we need to value families. And no family should have to pay more than 10 percent of their income on childcare. And under my plan, that would be what we would do.

And at the same time, we would work to give childcare workers a raise because despite how high the price is for families, the people who actually do the work aren't paid well at all. A lot of them are minimum wage workers, and a lot of them can't stay in the profession because it just doesn't provide enough of a living. In fact, in many places dog trainers are paid more than childcare workers. And I've talked to a lot of childcare workers who can't give their own children the care that they want them to have. And with the high turnover, it doesn't lead to the quality that any family should expect.

So I want to make childcare a profession that attracts and retains talented, qualified workers. As president, I would support states and cities that take steps to increase pay for childcare providers and early educators while at the same time making childcare more affordable for families by having a bigger government backstop. What I learned today in Lexington, they have a really great program, and they get subsidies from the state. They have a sliding scale of payment that is affordable. And that's exactly what we need to be doing for everyone.

And I want to help students who are also parents. That means getting more childcare centers on or near college campuses, like the one I visited today near UK. It also means easing the financial burdens on student parents so they don't give up on school because they can't afford it.

Back in Arkansas, I helped to start a scholarship for single parents, called the Arkansas Single Parent Scholarship Fund, to help defray some of the costs that single parents ran into because if your childcare falls apart, you can't go to class. If your old car that--you're living out in the country and it's the only way you can get to college dies, you can't get there because--and lots of places in Arkansas, Kentucky, and elsewhere, there's not a lot of mass transit that's going to get you to school. Right?

So we've got to do more. I'd like to do something similar to what I did in Arkansas nationwide because parents who get their degrees--their community college degrees, their four-year degrees--have better job options and better incomes down the road. So if we're serious about helping and supporting families, we've got to do more to support parents who are in school.

Now, every issue that I've mentioned, of course, matters to women. But let's remember, they matter to men, too. We need to help dads just as much as moms, and that goes for every kind of dad and every kind of mom. It shouldn't be about politics. It should be about families.

Now, having said that, we are in the middle of a presidential election right now, and there are real differences between what I believe, what we believe, and what the presumptive Republican nominee believes because at a time when families are struggling to pay for childcare and so much else, Donald Trump actually stood on a debate stage and argued that Americans are being paid too much, not too little. He's even talking about getting rid of the federal minimum wage, leaving it totally to the states, to the mercy of Republican governors, who have already cut the minimum wage for state workers. And that's happened right here in Kentucky.

And it's troubling to me because if you're going to grow the economy, I think it's kind of obvious you want people to be making money so that they can actually spend it and put it back into the economy. Donald Trump wants to get rid of the Affordable Care Act. Your governor is working hard to undermine what Kentucky has accomplished.

So I think with somebody like Donald Trump, you would see a race to the bottom across our country, with working families paying the price. And I don't think that's a risk we can afford. So we have to reject that vision and instead come up with a much more positive one for families and children.

I love being here at this center because I can see how patient-oriented and family-oriented you are. And I've fought for a very long time for childcare and paid leave and early learning. And I've done it because, obviously, I believe in it, and I've lived the work-family balancing act, trying to be a good mom, trying to be a good person at work. But I really believe that healthy, secure families are the foundation of a strong economy and a strong country.

So for me, this goes way beyond the specifics. And I would be so proud to be the champion of a center like this, or like the center I saw in Lexington, to carry your mission into the White House, and try to move into the 21st century with our family and health policies. I am defending the Affordable Care Act because it is working. And if somebody has a better idea, of course we will listen to it. But Kentucky did a really good job in getting people connected, and I met two people signing up just upstairs a few minutes ago. If it ain't broke, don't mess with it. Right?

And so I'm going to continue to speak out on behalf of the Affordable Care Act. And when people say they want to repeal it, they want to end it, they really can't tell you what they want to do because what they want to do will just send us back to where we were, where we had so many uninsured people, so many people suffering, so many people left out of the health care system. I think we are so much better off now than we were. And I know it gives a lot of peace of mind to mothers because we are the principal purchasers and motivators for health care. All the studies show that. We're the ones getting the checkups. We're the one urging people in the family to go to the doctor for X, Y, and Z. So we know that we need a system we can rely on.

And in order to have that system, we need a country that really values what you do here at the center, that is behind you all the way. And I've always believed, as some of you know, that it takes a village to raise a child, that we have a responsibility to support each other and create the best possible environment for kids to grow up so they, too, can thrive. Because when families are strong, America is strong. I think it's really as simple as that.

And so for me, I want to do everything I can, working with you, visionaries who have created this great comprehensive health center, to do more on behalf of all of our families. So I'm really here to say thank you for leading the way. Thank you very much.



In Loudoun County, Virginia, Hillary Clinton began a two-day tour of Virginia and Kentucky where she will meet with women and young families to discuss issues important to them. Hillary held a conversation with young parents about the challenges of balancing work and family. During the discussion, Hillary emphasized the importance of investing in early learning programs and making quality child care affordable for working families, as well as ensuring that families have good schools and affordable college as their kids grow up.

Well, thank you all for coming and having this conversation with me. It's clear that there are so many challenges facing young families today that we have to come to grips with, and we have to work together to try to find the best menu of options.

Because there is just no "one-size-fits-all'. People have different needs: childcare needs, sometimes even more--as Shanda and I were just talking about--even more challenging with special needs kids, and how we start early and provide that sort of support.

For some it's family leave, and particularly the absence of paid family leave, because that makes it more difficult to deal with everything from newborns to aging relatives. Others, it's just a continuing stress of a workplace that doesn't provide enough compensation with rising incomes. There still is a challenge with equal pay for women, which is real--it's not made up.

There are lots of concerns in the workplace that I'm hearing about increasingly--about the work day never ends, the schedules are often unpredictable. And even when you think you're gaining some control over that work day it's subject to so many variables that are out of your control, and often end up throwing big monkey wrenches into what should be your family time and your efforts to try and organize and stick with that.

So I hear about this all over the country, and I really want to talk about it and hear from you more than me talking. Because there are some obvious, maybe even typical, responses, but I'm trying to get a much broader view about what will work.

These are issues that I've worked on for a really long time, going back to my own life as a mother, a daughter, and some of the challenges there--but also in the work that I've done for the Children's Defense Fund, and other ways of trying to figure out how we have a more cohesive, and frankly welcoming, set of expectations and supports for families in today's world.

Because it's just harder, I think. It's just my take. I think costs are greater. Everything from commuting time to feeling like if you take that vacation day, you're going to be viewed as slacking off. I mean they are just--they are cultural as well as economic and structural challenges, so I'm just very interested in hearing what all of you might have to say.

Hello! Hello, East L.A.! I am so happy to be here. I want to thank Yamilex, who just introduced me. Didn't she do an amazing job?

I also want to thank the elected officials who are here. We've got a great turnout--Congresswoman Judy Chu, Congressman Xavier Becerra, L.A. County Supervisor Hilda Solis, California State Senate President Pro Tem Kevin de León, Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, and the president of East L.A. College, Marvin Martinez.

You know, I got to start by saying, on Cinco de Mayo, I can't think of a better place to be than right here. We're here because we all believe that we need to and we can and we must break down all the barriers that hold our people back.

And we are going to do that together because we should all rise together and share in the promise of America. And the stakes in this election have never been higher. Right?

Our next president has to meet three tests: Can you actually help families get ahead and stay ahead? Can you keep us safe? And can you bring our country together? Well, Donald Trump fails all three of those tests.

With all the challenges we face in America and in the world, we can't have a loose cannon in the Oval Office. That is a risk we cannot afford.

Now, as president, creating good jobs and raising incomes will be my number one priority.

And we will follow the lead of California and raise the minimum wage across America.

And we will guarantee equal pay for women's work. I think that's way overdue. How about you?

And we're going to also follow California's lead and make sure we have paid family leave for working families.

I will do everything I can to make the economy work for everybody, to help more people lift themselves out of poverty, lift themselves into the middle class, and go as far as their hard work and talents will take them.

I will also fight to make sure that every child has a good school and a good teacher, no matter where that child lives.

And we are going to fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship.

I will fight for that reform, but the first thing I will do is to preserve DACA and DAPA.

We're going to end raids and roundups. We're going to keep families together.

We know we've got work to do, but I think winning the election will really set that in motion. Don't you?

We also not only have to work for comprehensive immigration reform, we have to recognize that the kind of language coming from Donald Trump is hateful--and we need to repudiate it.

Now, every election is a choice, and just yesterday, Donald Trump doubled down on his plan to create a deportation force to round up millions of people. That's actually what he said.

He has pledged in his first days in office to scrap DACA and DAPA and to finalize a design for a giant wall on the border.

Well, the best way to prevent that from happening is to make sure he never gets near the White House.

Now, I am absolutely committed to doing this, and I need your help.

We have a primary here in California. I need everybody to get focused and work hard and talk to your friends, your neighbors, your families.

We have to turn out a big vote on June the 7th.

And in fact, starting next week you can vote by mail. You can vote by going down to the City Hall or the county house and saying you want to vote. So we have to get everybody.

There are no excuses. We've got to get everybody to vote.

And I hope you will tell people their futures are at stake. I cannot imagine a starker choice.

On the economy, I mean, honestly, Donald Trump actually says that wages are too high in America. I have no idea who he's talking to. Do you? He says we shouldn't raise the minimum wage. I'd like to see him live on $7.25 an hour!

I am proud to be campaigning in California, and I am proud to have the support of so many unions, including the United Farm Workers.

I think this crowd is ready, aren't you? But I can't do it without you. That's why when you leave here you've got to keep working to reach out to as many people as you can.

I want you to go to hillaryclinton.com and join this campaign. We are competing for every vote in every state, but particularly here in California--because I know that winning big in California will put us on the path to winning big in November.

Now, you know, somebody asked me the other day--somebody said, "Well, why are you so pro-immigration? Why are you so focused on making sure that we take care of the families that are here in our country and the people who have worked so hard?"

And there is really two reasons that I want to tell you.

One, because it's right, and it's what we do as Americans. We are a nation of immigrants, and I am proud of it.

We are stronger together, and our diversity is one of our strengths. So when people condemn or scapegoat or criticize or demagogue about immigrants, I wonder--where are they living? What do they know about how we have built this country?

We are a great country in part because we are a nation of immigrants.

But there's another more personal reason. When I was about 11 or 12 years old, I was asked by my church outside of Chicago to volunteer to babysit on Saturday mornings because we had so many migrant farm workers in the fields around Chicago. If you go to Chicago now, you can't imagine that. But when I was growing up, there were so many farms. They're all developed now, you've got a huge airport, but not in those days.

And so every Saturday the parents and the aunts and the uncles would take the older children to the fields and leave the younger children there, and they needed babysitters. So I said, "Yeah, absolutely." And my mother drove me and another girl out there to the camp where the families were living. They came out of Mexico, they came up through Texas, they came up through the Midwest, they came into the Chicago area, they went up to Michigan. Then, when they finished the harvest, they stayed or they went home.

And, you know, when people think about that, I want them to think that they were working hard to make a good living for their families. Just like they are today working hard to make a good living.

And I think it's time we treated everybody in this country with respect, with kindness, with love.

And I also think we'd be a lot better off if we actually talked to each other instead of yelling at each other. Let the other side do the yelling.

We're going to be talking and rolling up our sleeves and getting to work, because it's not enough to diagnose the problem, we need to solve the problems.

So you are great to be here with me today. I love the enthusiasm and the energy. Let's keep that going through June 7.

And then, after a few days off, let's get geared up again and go to the election in November. Are you ready, East LA?

Let's have a great election. Let's shape the future we want for ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren. Thank you, all, and God bless you.

Hello! Hello, East L.A.! I am so happy to be here. I want to thank Yamilex, who just introduced me. Didn't she do an amazing job?

I also want to thank the elected officials who are here. We've got a great turnout--Congresswoman Judy Chu, Congressman Xavier Becerra, L.A. County Supervisor Hilda Solis, California State Senate President Pro Tem Kevin de León, Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, and the president of East L.A. College, Marvin Martinez.

You know, I got to start by saying, on Cinco de Mayo, I can't think of a better place to be than right here. We're here because we all believe that we need to and we can and we must break down all the barriers that hold our people back.

And we are going to do that together because we should all rise together and share in the promise of America. And the stakes in this election have never been higher. Right?

Our next president has to meet three tests: Can you actually help families get ahead and stay ahead? Can you keep us safe? And can you bring our country together? Well, Donald Trump fails all three of those tests.

With all the challenges we face in America and in the world, we can't have a loose cannon in the Oval Office. That is a risk we cannot afford.

Now, as president, creating good jobs and raising incomes will be my number one priority.

And we will follow the lead of California and raise the minimum wage across America.

And we will guarantee equal pay for women's work. I think that's way overdue. How about you?

And we're going to also follow California's lead and make sure we have paid family leave for working families.

I will do everything I can to make the economy work for everybody, to help more people lift themselves out of poverty, lift themselves into the middle class, and go as far as their hard work and talents will take them.

I will also fight to make sure that every child has a good school and a good teacher, no matter where that child lives.

And we are going to fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship.

I will fight for that reform, but the first thing I will do is to preserve DACA and DAPA.

We're going to end raids and roundups. We're going to keep families together.

We know we've got work to do, but I think winning the election will really set that in motion. Don't you?

We also not only have to work for comprehensive immigration reform, we have to recognize that the kind of language coming from Donald Trump is hateful--and we need to repudiate it.

Now, every election is a choice, and just yesterday, Donald Trump doubled down on his plan to create a deportation force to round up millions of people. That's actually what he said.

He has pledged in his first days in office to scrap DACA and DAPA and to finalize a design for a giant wall on the border.

Well, the best way to prevent that from happening is to make sure he never gets near the White House.

Now, I am absolutely committed to doing this, and I need your help.

We have a primary here in California. I need everybody to get focused and work hard and talk to your friends, your neighbors, your families.

We have to turn out a big vote on June the 7th.

And in fact, starting next week you can vote by mail. You can vote by going down to the City Hall or the county house and saying you want to vote. So we have to get everybody.

There are no excuses. We've got to get everybody to vote.

And I hope you will tell people their futures are at stake. I cannot imagine a starker choice.

On the economy, I mean, honestly, Donald Trump actually says that wages are too high in America. I have no idea who he's talking to. Do you? He says we shouldn't raise the minimum wage. I'd like to see him live on $7.25 an hour!

I am proud to be campaigning in California, and I am proud to have the support of so many unions, including the United Farm Workers.

I think this crowd is ready, aren't you? But I can't do it without you. That's why when you leave here you've got to keep working to reach out to as many people as you can.

I want you to go to hillaryclinton.com and join this campaign. We are competing for every vote in every state, but particularly here in California--because I know that winning big in California will put us on the path to winning big in November.

Now, you know, somebody asked me the other day--somebody said, "Well, why are you so pro-immigration? Why are you so focused on making sure that we take care of the families that are here in our country and the people who have worked so hard?"

And there is really two reasons that I want to tell you.

One, because it's right, and it's what we do as Americans. We are a nation of immigrants, and I am proud of it.

We are stronger together, and our diversity is one of our strengths. So when people condemn or scapegoat or criticize or demagogue about immigrants, I wonder--where are they living? What do they know about how we have built this country?

We are a great country in part because we are a nation of immigrants.

But there's another more personal reason. When I was about 11 or 12 years old, I was asked by my church outside of Chicago to volunteer to babysit on Saturday mornings because we had so many migrant farm workers in the fields around Chicago. If you go to Chicago now, you can't imagine that. But when I was growing up, there were so many farms. They're all developed now, you've got a huge airport, but not in those days.

And so every Saturday the parents and the aunts and the uncles would take the older children to the fields and leave the younger children there, and they needed babysitters. So I said, "Yeah, absolutely." And my mother drove me and another girl out there to the camp where the families were living. They came out of Mexico, they came up through Texas, they came up through the Midwest, they came into the Chicago area, they went up to Michigan. Then, when they finished the harvest, they stayed or they went home.

And, you know, when people think about that, I want them to think that they were working hard to make a good living for their families. Just like they are today working hard to make a good living.

And I think it's time we treated everybody in this country with respect, with kindness, with love.

And I also think we'd be a lot better off if we actually talked to each other instead of yelling at each other. Let the other side do the yelling.

We're going to be talking and rolling up our sleeves and getting to work, because it's not enough to diagnose the problem, we need to solve the problems.

So you are great to be here with me today. I love the enthusiasm and the energy. Let's keep that going through June 7.

And then, after a few days off, let's get geared up again and go to the election in November. Are you ready, East LA?

Let's have a great election. Let's shape the future we want for ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren. Thank you, all, and God bless you.

Thank you. Thank you so much. Wow. I am so excited to be back in Athens. And it is great to be here at the end of a road trip through one of the most beautiful parts of our country. I thank Sherrod for his friendship, his leadership, his absolutely tenacious voice in the Senate on your behalf and on behalf of the values that made America great and will make us greater. So thank your superb senator. I really appreciate you being here, Sherrod.

I also want to recognize and thank Mayor Steve Patterson from here in Athens as well. All the other state, county and city elected officials. And of course, I have to thank Art. Art Oestrike, who invited us to come here, disrupting his entire brewing schedule. But did it with good cheer, having us here in Jackie O's. And I have made another campaign promise. I know I should stop making campaign promises, but I only make promises that I intend to keep, not promises I cannot make. And I have told Art that if I'm so fortunate enough to be back in the White House, some Jackie O's will be there too. Now, I will let him choose; it might be Razz Wheat, it might be something else, but I will let him choose what we will serve. Okay? So that's one promise I really look forward to keeping.

Over the past two days, I've had some extraordinary conversations -- tough and honest. I've met with coal families who want to be thanked, as they should be, for the work that they and their parents and their grandparents did to build our country. I've met with steelworker families who don't understand how China gets away with undercutting our jobs and businesses. And I've met with railroaders who have watched as the decline of coal and steel in this region has led to cuts in rail service, which cost jobs now and will cut the region off from more jobs later.

So to everyone who took the time to tell me about their lives, both the good and the bad, I am really grateful and thank you. I will not forget that generosity. Thanks to you, I've learned a lot--which is what I came here to do.

We started in Ashland, Kentucky, where I met with dozens of steelworkers who were laid off when the factory where they worked for decades was idled. Then we drove to Williamson, West Virginia, a town deep in the coalfields, where the community is working hard to build a more diverse economy after losing hundreds of jobs. Today, we had a conversation in Charleston, West Virginia, that was both sorrowful and inspiring, with people in recovery for addiction and the doctors, the counselors, the police officers, recovering addicts and others who are helping them get back on their feet.

I'm ending my trip here, in Athens, because small businesses like Jackie O's are what make this such a dynamic, entrepreneurial community--and we need more of that. It shouldn't have to be said, but I will say it: Appalachia is a vital part of the United States and--all of you here today and people across this region are vital to America's future. And I know that too often, people feel like they're not treated that way. But you should be.

Appalachia is home to some of the most resilient, hardworking people anywhere on this planet. And you deserve every chance to get ahead and stay ahead in America. Our country succeeds only when working people everywhere can succeed--not just in big cities, but in the hills of eastern Kentucky, right here in southern Ohio, deep in the coalfields of West Virginia, the small towns that dot this part of America. We need to break down all the barriers holding people back, not just here in Appalachia but across America, so everyone can share in the promise of our country.

Families here, like families everywhere, want the same things: good jobs that pay enough to provide a middle-class life. Good schools for kids and opportunities when they graduate. Safe and welcoming communities to grow up in and grow old in. And something less tangible, but just as essential: faith in the future, and confidence that your kids and grandkids will have all the choices and opportunities they deserve.

That shouldn't be too much to ask--especially for a place that has done so much for America. For generations, Appalachian coal put the lights on in people's homes and schools, kept assembly lines rolling in factories. Steel plants helped build our skyscrapers and win World War II. Appalachian chemical plants made the products that have shaped modern life.

These were tough jobs, but they provided a ticket to the middle class, but it wasn't an easy ride. More than a hundred thousand--let me repeat that: more than a hundred thousand--miners died on the job in the 20th century in America. More than twice that many succumbed to black lung disease. The United Mine Workers put their lives on the line in places like Harlan County and Blair Mountain to secure the right to organize, bargain collectively and protect the wellbeing of miners on the job and in retirement. Their hard-won victories helped strengthen the labor movement nationwide, and countless workers--not just those in unions, but countless workers--have benefited in all kinds of industries.

So there's no question that the workers of Appalachia made America more prosperous and more secure. And that legacy should be honored--not only as a rich chapter in our history, but as a debt we always must strive to repay.

Now, I know that for a lot of people in this region, these words may sound nice, but it's not so easy to believe them. You've had a lot of politicians make a lot of promises to you over the years that they couldn't keep. I'm not going to do that. What I can promise you is this: If I have the honor of serving as your president, I will fight for you and your families every day--whether you vote for me or not. I will be your partner. I will be your partner and I will not for one minute give up on Appalachia--not on your workers, your children, your retirees or your communities.

Now, some of you may be wondering how I can say all this. Because here in Ohio a few weeks ago during the Ohio primary, it sounded like I said something differently about coalminer jobs.

To put it plainly, I misspoke. It's one reason why I took this trip, to say that directly to the people who are affected, to make sure you know where I stand because I would never disrespect the people here. And I know that some may well say I'm talking about coal country, I'm talking about steelworkers, I'm talking about the region because of the election.

But let's be honest: In the broader region, this isn't one where a lot of Democrats running for president tend to win a lot of votes these days. And I know that there are people in this region--I met with some of them yesterday--who find it hard thinking about voting for any Democrat or voting for me particularly. But I am going to keep trying to convince people otherwise, but that's not what this trip is about.

I'm here because I do want to be your president. Because I believe that our best years can still be ahead of us. I am absolutely sure of that. But it's going to require not just what the president does, but what all of us do. It's going to require people once again being inspired by that spirit that has animated American history; that we don't just diagnose our problems and complain about them--we roll up our sleeves and we solve them.

And so for me, learning more about the lives of the people here and about what you want for your futures is critical to what kind of president I would like to be. There's nothing I take more seriously than that.

So I've said to people I'm going to try to earn every vote I can--and even if people don't vote for me in November, I'm going to be with them and with you every single day.

So let me be clear: At a time when our energy sector is changing rapidly, we need to invest in coal communities. We need to figure out how to bring new jobs and industries to them, and we need to stand up to the coal company executives trying to shirk their responsibilities to their workers and retirees.

The facts are clear: The energy market is changing here in America and around the world. But coal is still part of our energy supply, although it produces far less of our electricity than it once did. Even China is starting to burn less coal. That's good for the planet, but it has hurt American coal exports from this region. And no matter what some politicians tell you, these trends are here to stay. You've got solar panels, don't you, Art, on top of this brewery?

We're not going to go back to an energy system that looks like it did in the 20th century. We know we need to protect our children's health and futures by combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a clean energy economy. But that is still a transition. Anyone who pretends we can flip a switch and be in the clean energy future tomorrow isn't being honest with you either.

So we need to try everything we can to cut carbon pollution. That includes supporting cutting-edge work being done right here in Appalachia in institutions working on carbon capture and sequestration technology. This is too important to take any possible solution off the table.

I believe if we're going to go around the country talking about the benefits of a clean energy economy, which I have done for more than a year, then we have a responsibility to come to this region of our country and look people in the eye and talk about what that really means for your lives and livelihoods.

The impact on Appalachia is compounded by other economic challenges. The Chinese are dumping cheap steel in our markets, trying to fix their domestic economic problems on the backs of American workers. And a lot of families still haven't recovered from the Great Recession, which wiped out jobs, homes, and savings.

Yesterday, I met a man named Bo in West Virginia. He was a maintenance planner in a mining operation in Mingo County. He lost his job last fall. He showed me a picture of his three beautiful little children, a son and two daughters, and said he was trying to keep on a brave face for them, so they wouldn't know how worried he and his wife are.

"West Virginians are proud people," Bo said. "We take pride in our faith in God. We take pride in our family. We take pride in our jobs. We take pride in the fact that we're hard workers." So why, he asked, aren't there more programs in place already to help people like him? Why isn't there more help to turn to? How are we going to get new jobs there--not years from now, but right now?"

I'll bet everybody in here knows somebody in the same boat. And Bo was really clear. He's a Republican; he is not voting for me. But I really don't care about that.

We need to do better for Bo and his family and families like his across Appalachia and America, and that means--that means coming together, making a real plan to invest in the foundations of a strong middle class, namely good jobs and quality education for our kids and a level playing field for American workers.

That's what my plan for revitalizing communities here will do.

First, we've got to honor our obligations to miners past and present and stand with the steelworkers who are fighting for their livelihoods right now.

For months, I've been speaking out against the coal companies like Patriot and Peabody and Arch Coal that have tried to shirk their responsibilities to workers and retirees. Miners, power plant workers and railroad employees deserve the benefits they've earned and the respect of all Americans. And among the 100,000 miners who died in the last century, we've lost miners in this century too who are joined with them in sacrifice: the 29 brave men who perished at the Upper Big Branch Mine.

The owner of that mine, Don Blankenship, had neglected workers' safety for years. And because of weak laws, when he was finally caught, finally charged and finally convicted, he only received a one-year prison sentence. One year, for 29 deaths. That is totally unacceptable. We need to strengthen those laws and hold executives who neglect workers' health and safety to account. That is why I support two bills in front of Congress right now that Sherrod referenced: the Miners Protection Act and the Mine Safety Protection Act. They are critical.

They are critical to keeping faith with coal communities and protecting workers' health and safety on the job. I hope the Congress will pass them and the President will sign them as quickly as possible.

And by the way, I heard Mr. Blankenship was outside my event yesterday protesting me. Well, if Donald Trump wants the support of someone like that, he can have it.

And at a time when Chinese cheating is killing American steel jobs, I am not going to leave our steelworkers to fend for themselves. As president, I'll make sure we step up and initiate cases against China before jobs are lost, not after. And I intend to appoint a special trade prosecutor and push for stronger rule-of-origin standards so Chinese steel doesn't have back door to American markets, for example, as part of foreign cars.

And I oppose any effort to grant so-called market economy status to China because it would weaken our ability to stop China from dumping cheap steel on the global market. It's illegal and it's hurting American workers, and we've got to make it stop. I am so proud to be standing up here with your senator because he has been on the front lines of this, and together, Sherrod, we're going to make it happen.

Second, we need to invest in creating more good-paying jobs here in Appalachia. We know this region is rich in assets far beyond coal.

We also know that economic development plans designed in Washington without local input will not deliver results for you and your families.

That's why I want to support locally-driven priorities, not supplanting them. My plan will create a new Coal Communities Challenge Fund to support investments by Appalachians, for Appalachians.

I was in Mingo County yesterday, in Williamson, I heard from members of the community who were talking about how they are trying to generate more small business to create more jobs. They started an incubator to help local entrepreneurs get new ventures off the ground.

They knew that they needed better housing infrastructure, so they put people to work refurbishing homes and businesses.

They realized that many of their neighbors were struggling with opiate addiction and other chronic health issues like diabetes, so they opened a nonprofit health clinic.

Meanwhile, the county is stepping up by repurposing abandoned mine lands for new industrial park land that is bringing in and has the potential to bring in more big employers.

This is the kind of locally-driven development that I think can really work. The federal government should do more to support it.

Across the river from Williamson, in Kentucky, I learned about a company called BitSource. It trains former miners to be computer programmers and matches them to jobs in Eastern Kentucky. Silicon Valley tech companies are learning about these miners' technical chops and hiring them. Now this is not a silver bullet by any means, but it is helping. And we need to grow that kind of creative, entrepreneurial approach. Mix hardworking people skills that are needed. Created those jobs, attract investments.

And I'll tell you what: With more access to fast, affordable and reliable broadband, we could do even more in this region.

I'll tell you, eight years ago I spent a lot of time driving the roads of West Virginia. I spent a lot of time yesterday and today riding the roads of West Virginia. And you are disconnected. You are disconnected, though. I mean West Virginia deserves just as much broadband access of any place else in America and so does southern Ohio and eastern Kentucky and all the rest of the region.

That is one of my goals--just like we had to finish electrifying the country, because you know what happens. You get utilities, they'll go where the business is. They don't want to be climbing mountains and crossing rivers to get to 10 people. They want to go to cities and suburbs where it's easy. They want to come to a great university like this one where you've got a lot of users. We've got to finish the job of connecting up America.

And I'm convinced when we do we're going to see a whole bunch of new small businesses and creative ideas be put into action. And I do want to support what I learned about yesterday. Let's repurpose abandoned minelands and power plants to support new jobs, like the industrial park in Holden, West Virginia, which makes wood products on the site of a former coalmine.

And let's expand the New Markets Tax Credit, something my husband started back in the 1990's, to steer investment and private enterprise more to Appalachia.

Having a good job is about so much more than getting a paycheck. It's about dignity and a sense of purpose. I don't want young people to have to leave home to find those things -- I want them to be able to stay right here in this region, be near their family and friends, and earn a good living. Be able to give their kids a great life. You just shouldn't have to leave home when we're in such a connected world now. Let's connect ourselves up, let's get creative. And I know we can create a really bright future.

And the third part of our plan for revitalizing Appalachian communities is investing in education and training.

More than ever, some form of advanced education--doesn't have to be college or university, it can be technical education, apprenticeships, community colleges--but it makes a real difference. Now, we are going to make community college free and give all young people the chance to graduate debt free from any public college or university, like the University of Ohio. We will make it easier to pay off existing student debt--and, if you're an entrepreneur, we'll let you defer your student loan payments and pay no interest for up to three years while you get your business off the ground, because I want young people to take advantage of those opportunities.

I want to see young people be able to take advantage of incubators like ACENet here in Southeast Ohio. It supports up to 30 startups every year. And if we multiply that, think of what we will create together.

But we have to make sure that people who don't go to college get the education and training they need to get a good job. There are a lot of ways of doing that, but there are a lot of jobs out there. Last number I saw was 1.2 million jobs for people with skills in the trades--welders, tool and dye, machinists, and the like.

Now those jobs are not all in the same place, obviously--they're spread across the country. But when you think about that, the more people who have those skills, they can start their own businesses too. So we've got to really look hard at how we give every young person the chance to chart his or her own future.

Now, that begins earlier with good school and good teachers no matter what ZIP code your child lives in. And that is--that is a particular challenge for a lot of communities in the region, because when mines close, power plants shut down, steel mills go idle, school districts lose tax revenue. Look at what's happening in Waterford, Ohio. After a nearby power plant shut down, the school district lost more than a million dollars--out of a $7 million annual budget. They've had to lay off dozens of teachers. And that is just no way to give our kids the education that they need.

So I've been looking for ways that we can help. And back in the 90s, when the timber industry was in decline in the Pacific Northwest, we started a federal program to keep local schools open as they faced declining tax revenues. Let's make a similar commitment to Appalachian communities by making sure that as coal and steel and other factories have problems, it's not taken out on students and teachers.

And we'll take a hard look at retraining programs, the last thing that anybody needs are more retraining programs for jobs that don't exist. We have a whole bunch of those, let's learn from programs that really work.

Yesterday, in Williamson, I met a young man named Brandon. His dad was a miner, he always thought he would be too. But then his dad lost his job and that got Brandon thinking about his future. So while he was still in high school he learned about the training program offered by the Coalfield Development Corporation. Workers there spend 33 hours a week on the job, getting paid; six hours in the classroom working toward an associate's degrees; three hours learning life skills, like financial management.

So that's the path Brandon is taking, and when he's done, he'll have concrete skills that employers want: A two-year degree, some money in the bank, and he'll be able to build the kind of life that he's wanted--right in his hometown.

Fourth, and finally, we got to invest in families.

Raising a family is hard work anywhere and I think it's harder today than it was not so long ago. I talk to a lot of young parents. I'm really zeroing in on this now as a new grandmother. I pay attention to the struggles that young parents are facing. No matter what level of income and education, there are different challenges. And I think we've got to be more helpful, we make it just about as hard to balance family and work as we can in this country. That's why we need paid family leave that supports families taking care of their loved ones.

And why we've got to continue the work under the Affordable Care Act to provide quality, affordable health insurance, get the cost down, get more competition in the system. And we need to look at specific problems--like, for example, too many miners with black lung disease have been are denied the health care they need because coal company-funded lawyers and doctors withheld evidence or willfully misdiagnose them.

I know a little bit about this because way back in Arkansas when Bill and I were there teaching at the law school. He took on a bunch of black lung disease cases, about a hundred of them as I recall. He and I would travel to meet with the miners and their families to see what could be done to help them. Unfortunately, the problems never stopped.

We also know that this region loses too many young people. They go to college, they go for work and they don't come back. They don't see a way to make a living. Others stay and it's a real struggle. For many people, these problems are too big to bear. So we have drug abuse, alcohol abuse and suicide all on the rise across Appalachia. And, shockingly, for some--especially middle-aged white women--life expectancy is actually on the decline.

Apart from times of war, that's never happened in the United States. My husband and I have been talking about this for months when we saw the statistics. People are dying from opioid abuse, from heroin. They're dying from suicide, but I though Bill really put his finger on it. He said, "You know what they're really dying of? They're dying of a broken heart." This is a problem that should concern every American, we need to make a national effort. We can't go on like this. We've got to commit to treating substance disorders and mental health issues.

We should bring the same urgency and resources to bear as we do for heart disease or cancer. Addiction isn't a moral failing--it's a disease.

And mental health is just as important as physical health.

That's what we've got to commit ourselves to doing. Now these are all complicated problems, they all intersect and here are no easy solutions. But we can't just ignore them and we can't deny them. We need a full-court press--government, business, universities, community groups, advocates, people pulling together, learning from each other and that's exactly what I want to do.

You know the ideas that I'm putting out today are just a start. I'm going to take everything I've heard these last two days, add it to everything else I've heard over a lifetime and work with leaders like [] and others to come up with plans. It is truly not worth running for and serving as President if you do not help struggling and striving Americans get ahead and stay ahead.

And of course it's fair to ask--what is the other side offering? Unfortunately it's the same old trickle-down economics that has failed us before. Donald Trump doesn't talk about it much on the campaign trail, but his tax plan would give $3.2 trillion to millionaires and billionaires. The people in our society who need it the least. You know what we could do with that kind of money. We could make Social Security and Medicare solvent for the next 75 years for example.

We could repair, replace, and expand our entire national infrastructure. I just don't get it. The other side wants to give that money to the rich, what a waste! And they don't even bother to come up with solutions to most of the problems people talk to me about. They say things like, "Let's get out of the EPA. Let's get rid of the Department of Education." You know closing the EPA is not the answer to rebuilding a region as we transition to clean renewable energy. And closing the Department of Education is not going to stop the Chinese from dumping steel or reverse the decline in jobs.

It won't fix the roads or keep schools open. So we've got to stay focused on what we can do together and we know how do this, my friends. I am absolutely committed to working with everybody. I think part of the job of being President is being the convener and chief. Bring people to the White House, sit around a table, talk and listen to each other, maybe have a can of Jackie O's beer to get things going.

Because we don't have time to waste. People are discouraged, people are disheartened. People feel like our government, our politics and our economy have failed them. So let's make the wealthy pay their fair share, instead of giving them more tax breaks, let's invest in Appalachia, give the families here the opportunities you deserve.

Now, I want to close with a letter I recently received from another young man in West Virginia, also by the name of Brandon. There was a period of time that was a very popular name. His Dad is also a retired miner. And here's what he wrote: "The coal industry has always been up and down.

"We always made it through the tough times because of the people around us. We know what it is to be a community here in West Virginia. We come together when someone needs help."

That's not just his story. That's not just a West Virginia or Appalachian story. That's an American story.

At our best, we pull together. We lift each other up. I think it really does take a village to raise a child, to heal a community, to restore people's faith in themselves and in our country and our future.

So we cannot allow ourselves to be divided against one another, to be set against one another, to have scapegoating and shaming and blaming and insulting instead of an honest candid, conversation about what we're going to do together.

And so let's commit ourselves to make sure all of our families can live lives of dignity, security and opportunity and we treat each other with respect even when we disagree. Because we're not always going to agree.

And build that future that I see, a future of confidence and optimism, to break down all the barriers that are holding people back. I'm very excited about this. People ask me all the time, "Well, how are you going to respond to all these attacks, all these names that you're called?"

I said, "Really?" It's not like I haven't been dealing with that for 25 years. Really?

Because it's not about me, it's about us. I'm going to stand up and fight for you. I'm going to be on the front lines for this country that I love, that has given me and my husband so much, that I want to make sure I can look in the eyes of my absolutely adorable, 19 month old grandchild and I can say, "Honestly, you're going to be given every opportunity, but you know what's great about this country, Charlotte?

"Every kid is going to be given every opportunity and we're going to build a future that will take advantage of the talent and the hard work of every single one of our children."

Help me in this mission, Athens. Thank you! God bless you!

Whoa! I'll tell you what, that is an introduction second to none. I am so delighted to be here with all of you.

This is the 61st Annual Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner. I remember very well when my husband attended this event back in 2000, the final year of his presidency, Dr. Anthony. He came home, he could not stop talking about it. He said, "They call it a dinner but let me tell you, it is so much more than a dinner."

I saw that for myself four years later when I joined you as a Senator representing New York. And I'm grateful to be invited back because, yes, this is so much more than a dinner. It's a celebration. It's a revival. It's a giant community meeting with people from all over the world. It's a movement. And you're right, it only happens in one place: right here in Detroit, Michigan.

And I loved Reverend Anthony's words for what does happen here every year, not just this dinner but a weekend-long issue-tainment. It's not just entertainment. It's not just talking about issues. It's both. I think America could use a little issue-tainment because there's so much we need to talk with each other about.

We've got to figure out how we're going to work together, like you had all those young people come in here and march around, literally representing their ancestry from every place in the world. I'd like to bottle that spirit. Because if we can enjoy ourselves while we are trying to roll up our sleeves and work together and keep going for our communities and our country, we will be all the better off.

So I want to thank the Freedom Fund dancers and the great speakers for their magnificent interpretation of Langston Hughes's poem, "Let America Be America Again." They were wonderful. Thank you for sharing that with all of us.

I'm delighted to be here with so many distinguished elected leaders, clergy members, business and union leaders and so many people from not just Detroit, not just Michigan, but literally across our country. I want to thank all the elected officials. I'm particularly pleased to have this chance also to congratulate all of the award winners, starting with Congressman Clyburn, who is a deserving recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award. And I want to also recognize Senator Goeff Hansen for his award this evening; Mary Sheffield; Ivy Bailey; Shaka Senghor; and Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Jefferson. These are extraordinary Americans who deserve the recognition that you have given to them.

I got to admit, though, after that introduction in that typical low-key style--I'm a little bit worried I am going to shirk. Because I've got to say, you've got me all worked up about what we can do together based on [...]. And I want to start where the Langston Hughes poem took us. I appreciate the chance to hear that poem with new ears. I've read it many times. But as with all great works, there's always something new to discover.

And for me, what stands out tonight is that line right at the start. "Let America be that great, strong land of love." That is more than poetry, my friends, that's a prayer. It's one I hope we all try to carry in our hearts every day, especially in this wild political season.

This election represents such a critical choice for America. Yes, of course, it's a choice between different candidates, different parties, different platforms, and visions for America's future. But I think it's also a choice about something even more fundamental. It's about unity versus division, compassion versus selfishness, and love versus hate. The stakes don't get much higher than that.

So we've got to do everything we can to convince Americans to make the right choice. America has come a long way over the past eight years and I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for everything he's done to [] economy and make life better for American families.

And no one knows that better than Detroit. Look at what's happening across this great city. In Midtown and Eastern Market, Southwest Detroit, buses are running, new businesses are opening, families are moving in. There's a palpable feeling of pride and progress, Mayor. And meanwhile, the auto industry just had its best year ever. I think it was a pretty good investment America made in saving the auto industry and giving the auto companies, the UAW and the autoworkers a chance to show that Americans can compete and win. Innovation is on the rise across Michigan--the clean energy sector, the defense corridor and so much else.

So day by day and week by week, the people of Detroit and Michigan are doing what you've always done, making and designing things that America needs and the world wants. But we can't be satisfied until the economic revitalization we're seeing in some of Detroit's neighborhoods is felt in all of Detroit's neighborhoods.

We can't be satisfied until every parent has a good-paying job and every grandparent has a secure retirement. We can't be satisfied until all of Detroit's children are learning in good schools with good teachers in every classroom and no crumbling ceilings or mold or rats scurrying across the floor. And we can't be satisfied until all of Michigan's families have clean water to drink and bathe in.

We know what happened in Flint is unacceptable. We've got to make sure that kind of disregard for the lives of children and families is never allowed to happen anywhere else ever again. I'm grateful to Mayor Weaver and the leaders in Flint for their leadership, their shining that bright light. We're working together to make sure America can't ignore the families of Flint and to put young people to work helping distribute [] broken pipes. And President Obama's visit this week will help to bring even greater attention to what is needed.

I've said this many times in many places. There are too many Flints in America. Places where the water that children are drinking is not safe, where they air they breathe is not clean. We cannot get distracted, not until all of our children have what they deserve in every community across our country that has been left out and left behind.

Now, these are challenges of politics and policy, of course. But they really all do come down to our hearts. Do we believe that all of our kids are worthy of the best we have to offer. Do we believe that all Americans deserve to be treated with dignity and respect? Or do we think that some children are less worthy, some families less valuable, some people less than because of their race, religion, income, gender, identity or some other ugly excuse?

In other words, do we want America to be a place where, as Langston Hughes put it, equality is in the air we breathe? Or should we hold fast to what he called that same old stupid plan of dog eat dog, of mighty crush the weak?

Well, I believe--and I think everyone here at this dinner believes--it's time we put that same old plan to rest once and for all. That is how we will let America be America again.

I'm running for president because I want to knock down all the barriers holding Americans back--barriers of poverty and injustice, of unequal access to health care and education, unequal treatment under the law, unequal inclusion in our democracy. Let's knock them all down and build ladders of opportunity in their place that all of our people can climb. Let's make it possible for everyone to rise together and share in the promise of America.

And to do that, we need to face up to a painful reality. More than half a century after Rosa Parks sat and Dr. King marched and John Lewis bled, race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind. And that is not news to anyone here.

Many of you know that better than I. But I want you to know I get it and I see it. And it's important we have this conversation.

For many white Americans, it's tempting to believe that systemic racism is largely behind us. After all, that would leave us with a whole lot less work to do, wouldn't it? But anyone asking for your vote has a responsibility to see things as they actually are, not as we wish them to be.

Something is wrong when the median wealth for black families is a tiny fraction of that for white families. Something is wrong when gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young [] the next nine leading causes of death combined. Something is wrong when young black kids are arrested for petty crimes while white kids who do the same things aren't. And when black men are far more likely to be stopped by the police, charged with crimes, and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses.

Something is wrong when so many black parents are burying their children. Imagine if white kids were 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than black kids. Imagine if a white baby in parts of this country was twice as likely to die before her first birthday than a black baby. Imagine the outcry [] that would flood in to save those children.

These inequities are wrong, they're immoral, they're un-American, and they have to end. That's why I'm proposing a new comprehensive commitment to equity in opportunity for all communities in America. Real plans to create jobs. Hundreds of billions of dollars in new investments in cities like Detroit, including 20 billion aimed specifically at jobs for young people. Because the unemployment rate is way too high in too many places. We've got to close that gap.

We need to support home ownership. It's always been one of the surest ways for families to build wealth. And we need a real plan [] expanding access to capital to support entrepreneurs and small businesses, especially minority- and women-owned small businesses. They are the fastest growing businesses in America.

And while we're at it, let's finally ensure equal pay for women. Now, that would benefit women across the board, but particularly women of color, and lift up a lot of families.

So making these commitments requires tackling the crisis of unequal access to education. Our schools are more segregated than they were in 1968. We've got to reverse that. It's dangerous. We need a good school with a good teacher in the classroom for every child no matter [] that child lives in.

And we've got to make sure if you want to go to college, you can afford to go to college and not be held back by the lack of funds. I've got a plan so no one would have to borrow a dime to go to a public college or university. And we're going to help the millions of young people pay off the debt they already have.

And I want to give special support to historically black colleges and universities because they've produced some of the finest leaders in American history. They're still doing it today, often against great odds.

So we need to do all of this, and we also need reform--end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system.

The first policy speech I gave in this campaign over a year ago was about criminal justice reform. We have seen the toll on families torn apart by excessive incarceration, children growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty. Let's get back to that fundamental principle: everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law.

That means not just acknowledging but fixing the crisis of mass incarceration. Let's eliminate the disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine. Let's end racial profiling. These are things I fought for as a Senator; I will fight for them as president.

We are going to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline and create a cradle-to-college pipeline in its place. We're also going to do more to help people [] to society. They need a second chance. They should have the opportunity to get it. Let's ban the box. Let's give people a fair shot at competing for jobs. Let's invest in job training and housing so people trying to do the right thing have a real shot at rebuilding their lives.

And let's return the vote to everyone who has paid his or her debt to society. If America is really a country that believes in second chances, let's start acting like it. And let's end the tragedy of African Americans being killed by incidents involving the police, by learning from police departments doing the right things and applying those lessons across our country. Let's make sure the Justice Department has the resources to hold departments accountable when they get it wrong.

I've had the great privilege of getting to know the Mothers of the Movement who have lost children to gun violence or encounters with the police. I've sat with them. I've listened to them as they've talked about their children and their families. And I've seen how they support each other. Women who would never have met except for the unimaginable happening to them. They are members of a club no one ever wants to join, but they're channeling their grief into action.

They are fighting to make sure other mothers' children don't die like theirs did. If they are willing to turn their mourning into a movement, we can join that movement. Stand with them. Call for common sense reforms to reduce gun violence. Take on the gun lobby. Don't let them continue to not take responsibility for their actions. We've got to end the epidemic of gun violence and make sure that we don't lose any more of our young people.

You know, after the campaign is over and the lights are off, we have got to follow through on all of this. I want you to hold me accountable. I want you to know what I intend to do and then to keep saying, "Well, how are you doing? How are you doing, President? Are we getting it done?" I want to work with your elected officials. I want to work with the clergy. I want to work with business. I want to work with all of you. We are going to tackle these problems.

And we have got to make sure people turn out and vote in order to be able to do that. So let's make sure we get the vote heard and convince people to actually exercise that franchise, to knock down the barriers standing in the way, making it harder for people to vote.

I am very confident that we can come together to make this campaign one that will bring people together, that will unify our country, that will make it possible for us not just to campaign but to govern.

I am not new to these fights. As you heard from Reverend Anthony, I have been doing this for a long time, standing up to injustice, especially on behalf of our kids. That's always been my North Star, ever since I went to work for Marian Wright Edelman at the Children's Defense Fund.

So I know that this is not easy. I know it doesn't happen because we say it, we campaign on it. No politician should show up at election time and say the right things and think that's enough. Anybody asking for a vote should show you what their commitment is and what they will do to right the wrongs that plague our great country.

We've got some candidates in this race who are trying to divide us. We've got some candidates in this race who are stoking hatred and inciting violence. We've got some candidates in this race who are trying to set Americans against one another. We've got some candidates in this race who act as though Americans have no memory. So hold all of us accountable. Ask the hard questions. We deserve leaders who will tear down barriers, not build walls between us.

And we need to be sure that as we go forward in this campaign, we look out mostly for those left out and left behind. I'm asking all Americans to join in this. Systemic racism, inter-generational poverty, gun violence: these aren't somebody else's problems. These are our problems. These aren't urban problems. These are American problems. You prove every day that progress really does take a village. So let's make sure we act on that.

We have a saying in my campaign, "Love trumps hate." And I think that's exactly what we have to do. We have to demonstrate what that poem asked us to do. We have to remember the lessons from scripture. We have to look at our great country. Look at this amazing gathering: people from every background, every race, every religion coming together as one people, one nation.

There is no other place like it in the world. I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state. There is no place like America. Let's not endanger the promise, the potential, the dream of our country by giving in to these voices of hatred. Instead, let us remind ourselves of how far we have come together.

It was a tremendous honor to serve in President Obama's administration. Now America is deciding who will succeed him. The leading Republican contender is the man who led the insidious birther movement to discredit the President's citizenship. And when he was asked in a national television interview to disavow David Duke and other white supremacists who are supporting his campaign, he played coy.

We cannot let Barack Obama's legacy fall into Donald Trump's hands. We can't let all the hard work and progress we have achieved over the last seven and a half years be torn away. We have to move forward together. We have to bring our country together. We have to keep working toward that more perfect union. That mission feels more urgent than ever now that the Obama presidency is coming to a close.

We have been blessed to have this strong, thoughtful leader sitting in the Oval Office, an exceptional First Lady by his side. They have made us proud. They have represented America to the world with style and grace.

And it is up to us to make sure that when they leave the White House, the concerns and priorities they championed, the hopes and dreams that Americans have entrusted to them don't also leave.

So here is my promise to you: If I am fortunate enough to be president, I am going to keep fighting to tear down all those barriers holding back every American. My door will always be open. My administration will look like America. You will always have a friend and a partner in the White House. But I need your help, your wisdom, and your prayers in this campaign--and then every day afterwards.

There will be some difficult days ahead for our country, for this great city. But, as scripture tells us, let us not grow weary doing good for in due season, we shall reap if we do not lose heart.

And if we need inspiration, we can look to our history. Harriet Tubman is in the news these days. She is finally getting some of the acclaim she so richly deserves. I was proud to help to make her homestead in New York a national treasure to work to support the work that she has done that lives on.

Now, remember, among her many acts of extraordinary courage was leading slaves to freedom along the underground railroad. And she had just one instruction for those entrusted in her care: Keep going. She'd say, "If you hear the dogs, keep going. If you see the torches in the woods, keep going. If there's shouting after you, keep going. Don't ever stop. Keep going. If you want a taste of freedom, keep going."

So, my friends, let's keep going together. Let's organize and mobilize and make sure that love trumps hate once and for all. Thank you, and God bless you.

Thank you very, very much, and thanks to Eric Dean, president of International Ironworkers, and to Fred McCraw, who is the union steward for Local 473. I am really honored to be introduced by them because I do care deeply about the work that they do, the work that is done by building trades skilled workers across our country. And I'm especially pleased to be here at a business that works closely and productively with their union.

I want to thank everybody associated with Munster Steel, in particular Jeanne Robbins and Ron Robbins and Patricia Martin, who gave me a tour and explained what I was looking at and how it ends up in those bridges and buildings and everything that is built, and built to really survive and perform the functions that it is supposed to.

It's really great to be back here in northwest Indiana. I want to thank Mayor Tom McDermott for welcoming me back to Hammond. Thank you very much, Mayor McDermott. I also want to acknowledge Mayor Karen Freeman-Wilson from Gary. Thank you for being here. I know there are other elected officials -- the sheriff, the county sheriff is here; the county treasurer; council members; state -- other state senators. I am just really greatly honored to be here with you.

I want to say something to follow up on what Eric Dean said, because it had a profound effect on me. I was a Senator on 9/11 from New York, and so I got to know a lot of the people who were directly affected -- certainly the families of the 3,000 victims, many of whom needed help; the first responders who ran toward the building when it was first -- the first building that was hit, and kept running when the second building was hit; the police, the firefighters, the EMTs and others who saved countless lives by getting people out of the towers before they collapsed.

But as Eric said, at the same time that the first responders were running toward the World Trade Center, so were ironworkers and other skilled trades workers. The ironworkers in particular. I mean, there are a legion of stories of them literally getting off the worksite they were on somewhere else in New York, New York City, in New Jersey across the river, finding their way, hoping that because of their skills, they could aid in the search and rescue. Sadly, there weren't very many people to be rescued. People either died or escaped. But the ironworkers stayed on that pile for months, first to not only aid in search and rescue and recovery, but then to begin to move the debris, the steel beams off the site to begin to clear it.

So some of the ironworkers were on that pile for many, many months. And what Eric is referring to is what became obvious within days, that being on that site, breathing that debris and that toxic air was going to cause harmful health effects. And I became aware of that from visiting with and talking to and listening to ironworkers, police officers, firefighters and others. And that's when I began trying to help them get the health care that they need.

One of my prized personal possessions is a cross made for me out of a piece of steel from the pile by an ironworker who -- with whom I was meeting in a large group to talk about what I was trying to do to make sure that their health was tended to. And he came up afterwards and said he had taken this piece of steel that had been burned, that was still showing the marks of the terrible event, and had made that cross for me. So I have a particular sense of commitment to ironworkers, really to all the building trades, because of what you do every day to build our country, but also what I saw firsthand on that terrible day of 9/11.

It's a real honor to be in this plant, a family that has committed three generations to building this business and to carrying it on. And Ron was telling me about some of the investigations that his father came up with to make this product even more effectively fabricated, whatever it might be. So it's a real reminder that we have in our country people who get up every single day and go to work to build America. It's now our challenge to figure out how we're going to keep those jobs, grow those jobs, support those businesses, support those workers, support those unions, so that we can have a renaissance in manufacturing.

I believe passionately we can do this. That is why in this campaign I have laid out specific plans for how I would bring manufacturing back to places like Hammond, how I would work with business and labor to create the conditions that would enable us to do that, because it's not enough just to diagnose the problem. We all know we're losing jobs. We all know that we are facing unfair competition. We all know that we've got forces in our own country who seem determined to undermine manufacturing for reasons that I find just absolutely absurd.

So if you're looking at what's happening, you can see people, and there are probably some in this plant, who are doing the same job as their parents did but less money and fewer benefits. They're doing everything right, but maybe they can't even find a job in their chosen profession. And it's got to be hard to be optimistic about the future. And it's clear that we're giving too many Americans, particularly working Americans, a really raw deal.

So in this campaign, it's important that people not just give speeches and get everybody riled up. You need to ask them, what are you actually going to do and how are you going to do it? Give me the specifics. Don't just give me the rhetoric and the demagoguery. And that is why I have tried to be as specific as possible.

I'm just bewildered when I hear the Republican frontrunner, Donald Trump, actually say that wages are too high in America; that's why he doesn't support raising the minimum wage. And Republican governors and legislatures like yours right here in Indiana are waging a relentless assault on workers' rights. And I know Ted Cruz has called for a national right-to-work law. Well, right-to-work is wrong for workers, and it's wrong for America. And it's important to stand up against these domestic efforts.

We've got two sets of challenges. We have challenges from our own country, from businesses and political leaders who don't seem to understand that we still have to make it in America. We've got to make things and sell things around the world. And then we've got unfair competition coming from outside. So I recently heard that your legislature repealed the common wage. Is that right? And it was supported by the chamber of commerce, I was told. This is in total violation of Economics 101.

I mean, how do we grow the economy if people are not being paid what they deserve to be paid for the jobs they do? We are a 70 percent consumption economy. And if we don't pay people, we don't grow the economy. That's not good for families. It's not good for businesses. It's not good for Indiana, and it's not good for America. So we're going to go right at this. It's one of the reasons why I'm a strong supporter of the prevailing wage, of project labor agreements, and other ways of making sure that the people we depend on to actually build our country get paid what they should for it.

Now, I've been following what's been happening in Indiana, and I've read about some of the very large layoffs and the jobs being moved out of Indiana, even moved out of our country. I've read about Carrier. And I've got a set of plans that will incentivize companies who treat workers like the assets they are, not costs to be cut. And it is important that we do everything possible to make any company that shifts jobs overseas pay back any tax benefits they got from the American people.

Now, Carrier in Indianapolis plans to close down operations and lay off 1400 workers. UTEC in Huntington is laying off around 700 more. And that is just six months after their parent company spent $12 billion on stock buybacks for shareholders. And I stress that point because there are a lot of folks who think they know that all of this is caused by trade agreements.

And I believe trade agreements contribute to it, but it's also caused by quarterly capitalism, by activist shareholders, by company CEOs who don't put their workers, their long-term success and profitability, ahead of their own bonuses and the pressures that they are facing from the analysts that evaluate their stock.

So I'm saying to CEOs who think they can make a quick buck by turning their backs on our country -- the country, by the way, that made them successful in the first place -- we are not going to let you take advantage of us anymore. I'm going to stand up to both CEOs at home and China abroad. We are not going to let either one of these forces affect us. So if they invest in America, we'll stand with them. If they pay their fair share, we'll stand with them. But if they cut and run, we're going to pay a price.

So we need to have a policy coming from the very top in the White House where we don't just complain, we act, and we organize to act. And that's something that the ironworkers know a lot about, it's something that we do by looking in the long term, and that is what this company knows a lot about.

I want to just say a few words about trade and steel. One of the biggest and most important battles is over steel. China -- and other countries, but primarily China -- have been dumping artificially cheap steel into our markets to gain an unfair advantage. I really appreciate the fact that Munster Steel buys domestic steel.

​And I thank the Robbins family for that. In fact, they told me some of the steel they buy comes from a plant in Arkansas that I know quite a bit about because it was located there when Bill was governor of Arkansas.

So we've got this problem with China and other countries. And why is China doing this? Well, because demand in their own country has slowed down. But they want to keep their steel mills going because they want to keep people employed while they try to figure out what to do about their economy. Well, that's their problem, and we shouldn't let them dump it onto us.

And so what I am advocating is that, number one, they're trying to solve their domestic economic problems on the backs of American workers. It's illegal, pure and simple. Steel is crucial to our manufacturing base, crucial to our national security, and I will not let this vital industry disappear. I'm going to make the steel industry's survival one of my top priorities. Now, I've gone toe to toe with China's top leaders on some very tough issues, and as president I will go to bat for all of our trades -- for our steelworkers, our ironworkers, everyone who is absolutely looking for that kind of champion.

We are going to use every tool we possibly can against China for their illegal actions. I'm going to appoint a trade prosecutor, reporting directly to me in the White House, who will look for every possible way to prevent them from continuing this behavior. And I will have the federal government join with the trades and businesses in bringing trade cases against China. We're not going to wait for a union or a business to do it. We're going to join forces. We're going to do it together. We're going to go after the Chinese.

We are also going to reject -- one of the reasons why I came out against the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement -- we're going to reject weak automobile rules of origin in trade deals. That gives Chinese steel and other products an unfair back door to U.S. markets. And it's important that we recognize that it can still very well be Chinese steel even if it's in a Japanese automobile. So we're going to trace all their steel. We're going to have, as I said, a trade prosecutor who's going to prosecute these cases. And we're going to send an absolute message: You're not going to get away with this anymore. When I was a Senator, I testified for our businesses, and at that time it was the steelworkers in New York, before the International Trade Commission against some of their behavior back about 10 years ago. So I am committed to standing up and being as strong in this as I possibly can.

So standing up for workers, standing up for home-grown businesses, especially standing up for unionized businesses that recognize the importance of a high-quality workforce like the people standing right there. Now, I think this is important for our whole country. It's especially important here in the Midwest. Nearly one in five jobs in Indiana is in the manufacturing sector. That's a much higher percentage than in much of the rest of the country right now. I have a plan to invest $10 billion to bring unions, workers, businesses, universities, and the government together to create new manufacturing jobs. I have what I call the Manufacturing Renaissance Tax Credit to encourage investments in communities that are hit hard by layoffs and plant closings. I want to be a good partner for cities like Hammond and Gary that are really trying to get back jobs and are making all kinds of efforts to do that.

I know, from my own experience, American workers don't quit. And I'm not about to quit on them. We're going to lift up manufacturing, and I'm going to go after those politicians and decision-makers, whether they're in Indianapolis or Washington, who have a very short-term memory. They don't understand we built this country by making things and paying the people who make them a middle class wage. The American labor movement helped to build the American middle class.

We have to bring back middle class jobs and wages. We've got to get families once again having a higher standard of living, feeling that they are able to look to a better future for themselves and their children. I don't think there is a more important issue in this explanation. I'm going to bring that message to Indiana, as I brought it to Ohio, as I brought it to New York, brought it to Illinois, brought it to all the states that I have competed in, because it's a message that I care passionately about.

So I wanted to come today and I wanted to come to a place that is really doing a great job, a great job in what you make, what you sell; a great job in working with your employees; a great job having good relationships with the Ironworkers Local. I can tell you, this is the model I want to see us have across America. And with your help, I will do everything I possibly can to make that come true. Thank you all.

Wow. Thank you, Pennsylvania! What a night. I want to thank everyone--I want to thank everyone.

Thank you all so much. Wow. I just want to thank all of you, everyone who came out to vote here in Pennsylvania, and across Maryland, and Delaware, Connecticut, Rhode Island. I am so grateful to all our volunteers, our organizers, our community leaders. Everyone who worked their hearts out.

And I want to thank the leaders here in Pennsylvania. Thank you, Governor Wolf. Thank you, Senator Casey. Thank you, Congressman Cartwright. And thank you so much, Mayor Kenney, for your great help. And of course, I want to thank the 42nd president of the United States, my husband.

Now, with your help, we're going to come back to Philadelphia for the Democratic National Convention with the most votes and the most pledged delegates.

And we will unify our party to win this election, and build an America where we can all rise together--an America where we lift each other up instead of tearing each other down.

So we need you to keep volunteering. Keep talking to your friends and neighbors. Please join the more than 1.1 million people who've already contributed at hillaryclinton.com.

I know there are still too many barriers holding too many Americans back. But, despite what other candidates say, we believe in the goodness of our people and the greatness of our nation. And if anyone doubts that, just let them travel across this country, as I've done in this campaign the past year, hearing people's stories, learning about their struggles.

Listen to the quiet determination of the working parents I met last week in Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. They are doing everything they can to provide opportunities to their children in an economy where there still aren't enough good-paying jobs.

Listen to the mothers who lost children to gun violence and encounters with the police. They're turning their sorrow into strategy, and their mourning into a movement--a movement for justice and dignity.

Listen to the nurse I met this weekend in New Haven, Connecticut, who worked for years to build a middle-class life and raise a family. But then, her luck changed. She was diagnosed with breast cancer and used up all her savings and her sick time. Soon, she was facing foreclosure and the prospect of losing the home she'd loved for more than 20 years.

And here's what she said to me: "My daughter and I live in fear of the day that we might come home and have a lock on the door. We're in pain. We're hurting. We were, and are, the backbone of this country--the middle class. We're not asking for a handout. We just want to be treated fairly."

And she is speaking for so many people across our country who feel beaten down, left out, and left behind. People who have worked hard and done their part, but just can't seem to get ahead--and find it tough even to get by.

Now, underneath all those worries together, we are going to come together, and we are going to solve the problems we face.

And I am aware that too many people feel at the mercy of forces too big for anyone to control, and they just worry that those of us in politics put our own interests ahead of the national interest.

The faith that we can make things better, that we can give our kids a better future than we had, is at the heart of who we are as a nation. And it's one of many reasons that being American has always been such a blessing.

And our campaign is about restoring people's confidence in our ability to solve problems together--by delivering results that help people follow their own dreams.

That's why we're setting bold, progressive goals backed up by real plans that will improve lives. After all, that is how progress gets made. We have to be both dreamers and doers.

And as a great Democratic president once said, "There is nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what's right with America."

I believe we can create more good jobs with rising incomes--jobs that provide dignity, pride, and a middle-class life.

We can renew our democracy by overturning Citizens United.

We can lift up people and places who've been left out--from our inner cities to Appalachia, in every manufacturing town hollowed out when the factory closed, every community scarred by substance abuse, every home where a child goes to bed hungry.

That's what we Democrats believe in. That's what we know is possible. So we will build on a strong progressive tradition--from Franklin Roosevelt to Barack Obama.

And I applaud Senator Sanders and his millions of supporters for challenging us to get unaccountable money out of our politics, and giving greater emphasis to closing the gap of inequality. And I know, together, we will get that done.

Because whether you support Senator Sanders or you support me, there's much more that unites us than divides us. We all agree that wages are too low and inequality is too high. That Wall Street can never again be allowed to threaten Main Street. And we should expand Social Security, not cut or privatize it.

We Democrats agree that college should be affordable to all, and student debt shouldn't hold anyone back. We Democrats agree that every single American should and must have quality, affordable health care.

We agree that our next president must keep our country safe, keep our troops out of another costly ground war in the Middle East.

And we Democrats agree that climate change is an urgent threat. And it requires an aggressive response that can make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century.

And we Democrats agree on defending all of our rights--civil rights and voting rights, workers' rights and women's rights, LGBT rights and rights for people with disabilities.

So in this election, we will have to stand together and work hard to prevail against candidates on the other side--who would threaten all those rights and pit Americans against each other.

They would make it harder to vote, not easier.

They would deny women the right to make our own reproductive health care decisions.

They would round up millions of hardworking immigrants and deport them.

They would demonize and discriminate against hardworking, terror-hating Muslim Americans who we need in the fight against radicalization.

And both of the top candidates in the Republican Party deny climate change even exits.

Now, the other day, Mr. Trump accused me of playing the, quote, "woman card."

Well, if fighting for women's health care and paid family leave and equal pay is playing the "woman card," then deal me in.

So, my friends, if you are a Democrat, an Independent, or a thoughtful Republican, you know their approach is not going to build an America where we increase opportunity or decrease inequality.

So instead of letting them take us backwards, we want America to be in the future business.

That's why I want you to keep imagining a tomorrow where instead of building walls, we are breaking down barriers--we are making it more likely that Americans will be part of a prosperous, inclusive, decent society.

We're imagining a tomorrow where every parent can find a good job and every grandparent can enjoy a secure retirement.

We're imagining a tomorrow where no child grows up in the shadow of discrimination or under the specter of deportation. And where every child has a good teacher and a good school, no matter what ZIP code that child lives in.

And imagine a tomorrow where any young person can graduate from college debt-free.

Or imagine a tomorrow where hard work is honored, families are supported, streets are safe and communities are strong, and where love trumps hate.

That is the future I want. I want that future for my granddaughter and for all of our children and grandchildren.

Now, think of this: Our nation was born right here in Philadelphia. Our Declaration of Independence and Constitution were signed just a few blocks away. And ever since--even through dark and difficult chapters of our history--the idea of America has shone through.

At our best, we are, as Robert Kennedy said, "a great country, an unselfish country and a compassionate country."

But America's greatness is not a birthright. It must be earned by every generation.

So please join us. Join us. Go to hillaryclinton.com. Text JOIN, 4-7-2-4-6. Volunteer, contribute. Let's go forward.

Let's win the nomination, and in July let's return as a unified party. Thank you all so much.

Wow. I am so happy to be here with all of you. Thank you so much.

I want to thank Helen Magana, who just was up here introducing Senator Reed. She is the valedictorian there at the high school, and I am so pleased that she could be here with us.

I want to thank your fabulous congressional delegation. I had the great honor and privilege of working with them: Senator Jack Reed, and Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, and Congressman David Cicilline, and Congressman Jim Langevin. And I think you know you've got a great quartet in Washington representing this state. And I look forward, if I'm so fortunate enough to be your president, to working closely with them to really do everything we can for Rhode Island.

I want to thank your governor, Governor Gina Raimondo, who's here. And I know that your governor is going to need a president who is going to work with you to bring jobs and raise incomes, just like (inaudible). And I want to thank Mayor James Diossa from right here [in Central Falls]. I'll tell you what, it's great to see a young mayor with that kind of enthusiasm and commitment. And I want to also thank Nellie Gorbea, the secretary of state. And the Rhode Island Democratic chair, who I know is here somewhere, Joe McNamara. Where's Joe? Hey, Joe! Thank you.

Okay, everybody, I got to tell you, I am so happy to be back in Rhode Island. I love this little state. I have so many friends here.

I know how resilient and hardworking the people in this state are. And I'm here to tell you what I want to do as your president to make sure that everybody in Rhode Island has the chance to get ahead and stay ahead--because we will have more good jobs with rising incomes that will lift up people. And I know we can do it.

Now, how do I know we can do it? Because it wasn't so long ago that we did it.

And I know that my Republican opponents get upset when I say this, but it does happen to be true: The economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House. And I kind of like what happened in the 1990s. It wasn't that long ago, but we had 23 million new jobs and incomes went up for everybody, not just people at the top: middle-class families, working families, poor people. More people were lifted out of poverty in those eight years than at any comparable time in decades.

And then people say, "Well, what happened? We were on the right track. The median family income went up 17 percent. Some of us remember that. The median African American income went up 33 percent."

Well, I'll tell you what happened: A Republican President happened. And I know, because I was in the Senate arguing against--voting against--the return of trickle-down economics.

Look what happened. They cut taxes on the wealthy. They took their eyes off of the financial markets and the mortgage markets. And we ended up in the worst financial crisis that had faced this country since the Great Depression.

And Rhode Island was especially hard-hit, wasn't it? In 2008, when Barack Obama was elected, right after that election he called me, asked me to come to see him in Chicago. I didn't know why. It turned out he wanted me to be secretary of state. But before we got to that--before we got to that, he just looked at me and he said, "It is so much worse than they told us."

And it was. We were losing 800,000 jobs a month. Nine million Americans lost their jobs. Five million homes were lost. $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.

Now, why am I saying this? So we don't forget that there is a direct connection between the failed economic policies of the Republicans and what happened to so many middle-income Americans.

Because they're coming back--they're coming back with the same snake oil. That's what Trump and Cruz are peddling.

I think that's the right reaction. And I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch that the Republicans put our country into.

So we are standing, but we're not yet running the way we need to. And here's what I want to do: I want to get us back into the job creation business.

I want us to make many more investments in infrastructure--our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our water systems. Those are jobs that can't be exported. They have to be done right here and they have to be done by people like the laborers and (inaudible) and others of the trades. I have no doubt in my mind that if we don't make those kinds of investments in infrastructure, we're not going to make as many jobs and create as much economic growth as we're capable of making.

I also want us to invest in advanced manufacturing. I still believe we can make it in America, and we can compete because we have the best workers of anywhere in the world.

And then we're going to combat climate change by creating clean, renewable energy jobs.

And I want to see us go back to doing what works to build the American middle class, and that includes supporting the American labor movement to organize and bargain collectively. We cannot revive the American middle class unless we do revive the American labor movement, because you are not going to get the kind of fair wages and benefits that workers deserve if they don't have power at the negotiating table. I plan to use the bully pulpit of the White House and the Department of Labor to enforce the labor laws we already have on the books.

We're going to end wage theft, which is a problem across America. We're going to go after overtime problems where people are not being paid fairly for the work they do. We are going to go after raising the national minimum wage so people who work full-time are not going to be left in poverty at the end of the year.

And we are finally going to get equal pay for women.

Now ... Let me tell you that this is not just a women's issue. If you've got a mother, a wife, a sister, a daughter who are working, it's a family issue. It's an economic issue.

And there is no women's discount when we go to pay, checking out at the supermarket, is there? I mean, I know--I've shopped for a lot of years. And when I go check out, I don't have the cashier say, "Oh, you're a white woman. You only have to pay--what is it now--78 cents on the dollar." Or, "You're an African American woman, you only have to pay 65, 66 cents," or, "You're a Latino woman, you only have to pay 55, 58 cents." That has never happened to me.

And it is time we recognize this is a question of fundamental fairness, and here is another element to it that I want you to think about. I was with Lilly Ledbetter yesterday. And some of you know who she is. The Lilly Ledbetter Pay Act is named for her, and here's why. She went to work in a factory in Alabama 40-plus years ago. And she was promoted. She became a supervisor--the only woman among all the supervisors.

She did not know for all those years she was paid 40 percent less for doing exactly the same job. Her family was cheated.

And you know what else that means? That means that when she retired her Social Security payments were less than they should have been because she was never paid what everybody else was paid.

So this is the kind of issue that we talk about raising incomes. This could raise incomes immediately. Raising the minimum wage, guaranteed equal pay--that will help so many families that are struggling right now.

So I have put forth a jobs program. It's easy to diagnose the problems, but you've got to come up with solutions for problems.

It is not enough to say what's wrong. We can see that, but we've got to come together to fix what's wrong.

And we're going to do more to help small businesses, because that's where most of the new jobs will come from, and particularly minority and women-owned small businesses that are growing (inaudible).

And, I've got to tell you, I am excited by what we can do. I know it's hard work, and I know everything I've just told you the Republicans don't agree with.

Donald Trump actually says wages are too high in American. Honestly, I don't know who he spends his time talking to, but I recommend he get out of one of those towers and actually go down and talk to some folks and (inaudible).

And we know there's a connection between the jobs we can get and the ladders of opportunity we can build by knocking down the barriers that stand in the way and education. So here's what I believe: I believe we've got to, number one, have early childhood education, to get more kids prepared to be successful when they're going to school.

Number two, we have to support our teachers and our educators who are working (inaudible).

Number three, we need to get more technical education back into our schools, our high schools, and our community colleges. We need more apprenticeship programs like the ones the unions run so that more people can have a chance to acquire the skills.

We have 1.2 million jobs right now in America today that pay 50-, 60-, 70,000 a year for tool and die makers, and welders, and machinists--skilled tradespeople. We need to convince more young people to go into those jobs if that's exactly what they want to do and the kind of life they want, and we need more training programs. That's why I want to incentivize more apprenticeships.

And we are going to make college affordable for everybody.

Under my plan you can go to a public college or university debt free. Now, I have a difference with my esteemed opponent, who wants free college to everybody--but, I have to tell you, I don't want free college for people who can pay for it like Donald Trump. I think we have to focus on where the need is, and to meet our middle-class families and working families and poor families. So we're going to put the money where it's most needed so that every young person who wants to go to college will be able to afford (inaudible).

And then, because they will be debt free they will come out debt free, so now we've got to deal with the problem of everybody who has debt already. We have 40 million Americans with student debt. Here's what I want to do: I want you to be able to refinance your student debt, just like a mortgage or a car payment.

So we're going to get that debt down and off of the backs of young people. We're going to put a time certain when it's over, and we're going to stop the government from making money lending money to young people to go to college (inaudible).

I will also defend the Affordable Care Act, because before there was something called Obamacare there was something called Hillarycare. And some of you remember my husband and I tried really hard to get a system for affordable care. And the drug companies and the insurance companies beat us. That's just as plain as I can say it. I do have some experience in dealing with special interest and powerful forces (inaudible).

So when they weren't successful on that, I said, "Okay, what are we going to do now?" And that's when we went to work to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which insures 8 million kids.

So that's why I was so happy when the Affordable Care Act passed--because I know it is literally saving people's lives. There is not a week that goes by that somebody doesn't tell me what a difference it has made in their lives.

The Republicans want to repeal it. I will never let that happen. ... I want to get the costs down--copays, and deductibles, and prescription drug costs down.

And I want to deal with two other problems--mental health and addiction.

When you travel, as I have now for more than a year, there are a couple of things that come up everywhere in the country that people talk to you about. People talk to you about the economy, getting wages up. People talk to you about student debt. And people talk to you about mental health and addiction.

We have got to do more to help people deal with mental health issues, and make sure insurance companies provide payment for those services. And we have got to have more programs for treatment and recovery in addiction, particularly with opioids and heroin.

Now, I want you to listen closely to the Republicans, because they are telling you what they want to do in our country. And Trump keeps saying things like, "Well, I didn't really mean it was all part of my reality TV show; running for president, we'll be on your screen."

Well, you know what? If we buy that, shame on us. Because he's already showed us what he believes and he's already said what he wants to do, and he wants to go after every one of the rights we have.

So I want to tell you where I stand.

I will defend a woman's right to make her own health care decisions. I will defend Planned Parenthood against all of these attacks. I was honored to be endorsed by the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, and they [endorsed] because I've been on the front lines of this battle for a really long time.

I will defend--I will defend marriage equality and work to end discrimination. We can't let laws like those passed in North Carolina and Mississippi stand.

I will defend voting rights.

And on the first day of my campaign I've said I will do whatever I can to reverse and end Citizens United.

I will defend workers' rights.

I will defend Social Security against privatization and work to increase the Social Security Trust Fund.

I will defend Medicare, and I will defend the Veterans Administration from the schemes that the Republicans are promoting. We have to make it work, but we can't let it be privatized.

I will keep working for comprehensive immigration reform ...

And I will continue to take on the gun lobby and fight for commonsense gun (inaudible). There is no doubt in my mind that we can do this consistent with the Second Amendment of the Constitution. Comprehensive background checks, close the gun show loophole, close the online loophole, close what's called the Charleston loophole, and end the special protections Congress voted for to give gun manufacturers and sellers special immunity from accountability.

If you have, as I have, met a lot of family members who have lost loved one to gun violence, it's no longer a statistic. We lose on average 90 people a day, 33,000 people a year. If something else were killing 33,000 Americans we would be organized and focused and working to try to save lives. Well, we are going to save lives by moving towards gun reform that will help us do that.

So when you think about who you vote for on Tuesday, the first test is: Can this person produce results--jobs, education, health care, protecting our rights?

And the second is: Can this person be Commander-in-chief and protect America and (inaudible). And I have to really thank your senator, Jack Reed, who understands as much about national security as anybody in Congress--and probably nearly anywhere else. I was deeply honored that he endorsed me, that he has said what means the world to me--that I will keep America safe, because I will spend every minute of every day making sure that we do just that.

There's a lot of work to do. I'll just make two quick points here, because, again, there's a really big difference between where I am and where the Republicans are. Foreign policy and national security can't be an afterthought, something you'll get to sometime, because you never know what's going to happen. It can be on the very first day of your administration, and it can be something that nobody had predicted.

But here's what I want you to understand about Trump and Cruz, because it's a really significant difference: What they say about the world is not only offensive--it's dangerous. And, in particular, when Donald Trump says bar all Muslims from coming to our country, that sends a message around the world. We have to put together a coalition to defeat ISIS, and in that coalition we need Muslim-majority nations.

And I know something about putting together coalitions, because I put together the coalition that imposed sanctions on Iran, and included China, and Russia--and brought Iran to the negotiating table. So when I think about putting together that coalition, I know it becomes harder if somebody running for president is insulting the religion of some of the nations that we need in the coalition.

He also basically said it's fine for countries--more countries--to have nuclear weapons, and fine if we pull out of NATO.

Loose cannons tend to misfire, and what we have with him is the loosest of all cannons.

And then Ted Cruz talked about special police patrols patrolling neighborhoods where America's Muslims live.

Now, how we would ever do that I don't think adds up, but the best response to that comes from the NYPD, and I've worked closely with them after 9/11 because I was a senator on that terrible day, and they know as much about keeping us safe and dealing with the threats that we have to face as anybody in our country, because, unfortunately, they've had to. And so when Cruz said that, the chief of the department said, "Well, I don't know how we would do that. We have a thousand American Muslims in the NYPD."

And Bill Bratton, the commissioner of police, sort of summed it up by saying, "Ted Cruz doesn't know what the hell he's talking about."

Now, and finally, the third test: After we talk about who can get results--who has the track record, who has the experience, who's actually produced positive changes in people's lives, who can keep us safe--the third is who can unify our country.

Well, that is, I hope, the right answer. Thank you for that. But I want to say just a couple of things about this, because Sheldon Whitehouse, your senator, wrote a wonderful book about American values. And if you look at where we are in history, no country--no country--has been as successful in governing ourselves, in making it possible for people to pursue their own dreams.

But you can't take that for granted. We have work to do. We've got to start listening to each other, respecting each other, let's even say being kind to each other again.

We are going to have disagreements. That comes with the territory of being Americans. We have different political views. That's fine. But we also have to solve our problems.

So I want you to know this: As first lady, and senator, and secretary of state, I worked with lots of Republicans. Republicans with whom I didn't have a whole lot in common--but it was the right thing to do to try to solve your problems.

And I will go anywhere, anytime, to meet with anybody to find common ground, and I will also stand my ground so that we get to a point where we make progress together.

Your members of Congress and (inaudible) senators, both David and Jim, they're hardworking. They really try to make a difference. Well, we need everybody to feel like we can do that again, because at the end of the day we can't create the opportunity I want to see for every single American to live up to your own potential, and particularly our children, if we don't--if we don't have the kind of vision and strategy and effort that's going to lead us in the direction of the future that I want for our country.

And so that is why I tell people, "Here's what I want to do, and I want you to hold me accountable."

I am not making promises I can't keep. I am not making statements that drive us further apart. Every time I do an interview, the interviewer says, "Well, here's what Donald Trump called you today. Would you like to respond?" I say, "No, I don't want to respond." I will respond to what he says about everybody else--immigrants, women, Muslims, John McCain, everybody else he's insulted--I will respond on their behalf. But I'm interested in what we can do together, not increasing his exposure on television.

So here's what I'm asking you. Tuesday is a big day. Five states are voting, and I need your help on Tuesday. I need you to go to the polls and bring everybody you can (inaudible).

And I promise you this: If you will go vote for me on Tuesday, I will stand up and fight for you through this campaign, all the way into the White House, for every day that I am honored to serve. Thank you, Rhode Island. God bless you.

Hillary Clinton contrasted her plans to raise incomes, fight for equal pay for women, and break down the barriers that hold families back with Donald Trump's belief that wages are too high, an organizing event in Dunmore, Pennsylvania.

Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Bob Casey.

Wow, it is so great to be back in northeastern Pennsylvania, to be here in Dunmore. I stopped in Scranton on my way here. I always feel so much at home. I stopped at Casa Bella restaurant. But I was running late, so my plan to actually eat dinner was kind of abbreviated.

But I said hello to a lot of people there, and I met people who said things to me like, "I knew your cousins, I knew your uncles." I had one man say, "Didn't we sled down Court Street one winter?" I said, "Could have been, could have been--I was there." Met another woman who lived next door to my grandparents on Diamond Avenue, and it just brings back a flood of the best memories and the best people, and I can't tell you ... how happy and proud I am to be back here with all of you.

I want to thank not only the senator, I want to thank the congressman. Thank you so much, Matt Cartwright. I want to thank the mayors--the mayor of Dunmore, the mayor of Scranton, who are here; the Democratic county chair and the Democratic chair of the city of Scranton. I want to thank Sandy (ph) and everybody who has helped to make this evening just such a happy occasion.

I've got my two brothers here. They love coming back, and, of course, they go every summer to Lake Winola--to the cottage that my grandfather built. So this place has a lot of not just memories but special meaning to me.

And the thing I want you to know more than anything else is I will work my heart out for the people in northeastern Pennsylvania. I will be a good partner, because we have work to do.

We have work to do to make sure we have enough good jobs with rising incomes for people willing to work to get ahead and stay ahead. And we're going to ... we're going to look for those new jobs in infrastructure jobs: our roads, our bridges, our ports, our airports, our rail system all need work.

And I agree with Congressman Cartwright: We need passenger rail service from northeastern Pennsylvania.

So when I think about infrastructure, I think about good jobs--jobs that can't be exported, jobs that put people in this area to work, that pay a good wage so that people can get ahead.

And we're going to also look to see what we can do in advanced manufacturing, because I believe we can still make it in America, and we're going to find ways to do that.

And we need more clean, renewable energy jobs that will put people to work right here.

And we need to help small businesses. Small businesses create most of the jobs. And we're not creating enough small businesses. We've got too many obstacles in the way.

My idea about economic growth and development is: Let's knock down the barriers--the barriers that stand in the way of people being able to start businesses that will employ more people.

And we're going to work hard to raise the national minimum wage because ... you have 150,000 Pennsylvanians working for $7.25 an hour. You've got thousands more working on what's called the tipped wage.

Okay, some of you know about it, but a lot of you don't. It's kind of a secret, but here's how it works: If you're in certain jobs--like waitressing, bartending, hair salons, those kind of jobs--you can be paid as little in our country as $2.13 an hour, because, the idea is, you're going to make a lot of money from tips.

I'll tell you what, that is just a disgrace.

So if people are working full-time, they should not still be in poverty at the end of the year. And two-thirds of all minimum wage workers are women, and many of them are single moms taking care of their kids.

So I am going to fight to raise the minimum wage at the national level, and I'm also going to do everything I can to guarantee equal pay for women's work.

And you know why? I'll tell you: This is not just a women's issue. If you have a mother, a wife, a sister or a daughter who are working and they are not being paid what they should be paid compared to others, then you're getting shortchanged--your family is, the economy is.

I did an event this morning in Philadelphia with a woman named Lilly Ledbetter. Some of you know that she worked as a supervisor in a factory in Alabama for 40 years. She had a supervisor job; she was the only woman with a supervisor job. And she did not know for years that she made 40 percent less than the men doing the same job.

And as she rightly said, she and her husband were working hard, and when she and I were talking she said, "You know, when you go to the store, you don't get a women's discount because you don't get paid the same."

And now she's retired, her Social Security won't be the same, because she was not paid the same. Her 401(k) will not be the same. So this has a lot of implications for everybody and it's time we said, "Look, in America, if you do the job, you get the equal pay--men and women alike."

And we have to do more to raise everybody's pay, because nobody is getting a raise.

And we've got to make sure that we go where the money is when it comes to funding things like passenger rail.

They money's at the top. I am the only candidate running in either party who has pledged I will not raise middle-class taxes, because the middle class needs a raise, not a tax increase.

That's why I've laid out all these plans about how we're going to create jobs, how we're going to end the loopholes, get rid of the deductions that give people at the top a chance to go a lot further than anybody else.

And it is a fact that the economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House. Because everything I've just said, the leading Republicans don't agree with.

Donald Trump actually says ... he actually says wages are too high in America. I mean, honestly, I don't know who he talks to.

He ought to get out of those towers and actually come down and talk with people and listen to them.

My husband was here a week or so ago, and it wasn't ancient history. Some of us can remember, we had eight years with 23 million new jobs. And during those eight years, incomes went up for everybody--not just people at the top: middle-class families, working families, poor families. There were enough jobs, and the incomes were going up, so the median family income went up 17 percent in those eight years.

Now, it won't surprise you to hear me say I think there are some lessons we can learn from that.

And there's another lesson we can learn: Why didn't it continue? Well, because we got a Republican president, and they went back to trickle-down economics.

And pay close attention to what Trump and Cruz are saying. They want to go back to trickle-down economics on steroids. We've been down that road; it did not work.

We had a Republican president who slashed taxes for the wealthy. I was voting against it in the Senate, speaking out against it in the Senate. They took their eye off the financial markets and the mortgage markets--and we had the Great Recession, and a lot of people haven't even recovered from that.

So, for heaven's sakes, why would we go back to the failed policies that dropped us into the ditch that the Republicans dug for our country?

And I know how hard it was. We were losing 800,000 jobs a month when President Obama was elected. Nine million Americans lost their jobs--multiply that by family members. Five million homes lost--multiply that by family members. $13 trillion in family wealth wiped out.

I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of that ditch and putting us back on solid ground.

So we are back creating jobs, we are back with a lower unemployment rate--but we don't yet have the kind of energy that's producing the results that I want to see for the American people.

That's why we've got to build on what has been done. Don't get talked into some sort of a detour.

I love it, the Republicans--and I did listen to them during the last year, that's--I did it so you didn't have to. And you know they all say things like, "Well, it's the slowest recovery in history." That takes a lot of nerve. We wouldn't have needed a recovery if they hadn't wrecked the economy in the first place.

So I got to tell you, I don't know who they're going to end up nominating, but I'm looking forward--if I'm fortunate enough to be the nominee--to actually having a debate about economics, a debate about more good jobs, a debate about rising incomes.

I'm also looking forward to debating about education, and what we need to do to invest in education.

Every child in this country deserves a good teacher, in a good school--regardless of the ZIP code that child lives in. And we need to do more for early childhood education, so more kids are prepared when they actually get to school to learn.

And I want to be a good partner with our teachers and educators, and I appreciate them being here with their blue t-shirts on. Thank you.

And we're going to make college affordable. And I've laid out a plan about how we're going to do it, how it will work--and I know that we can actually make it happen, because it is something that now is stopping a lot of young people from starting college and completing college.

And see, my plan has debt-free tuition--but it also says to colleges, public colleges and universities: You've got to get your costs under control, you've got to take a hard look at what you are charging young people and their families.

And my opponent's plan relies on Republican governors to pay a third of the cost. Somehow, I don't think a lot of these Republican governors are going to do that.

So I don't want to make promises I can't keep. I've put forth a plan that I can deliver debt-free tuition on.

And then we've got to tackle the debt that young people already have.

How many people here have student debt? How many have ever had student debt? I meet young people with tens of thousands of dollars of student debt and really high interest rates, right? And I've got to tell you, it makes no sense.

I took out loans when I went to college and law school, but I didn't have a 10, 12, 14 percent interest rate--and I meet young people across this country who do.

So we are going to let you refinance your student debt. If you can refinance a mortgage or a car payment, you sure ought to be able to refinance your student debt. And if you pay your student debt payments every month, we're going to have a cutoff time. After 20 years, you're done--because it should not keep going for the rest of your lives.

We're also going to work to make sure that health care is affordable and that you have choices.

I'm going to defend the Affordable Care Act, because it took so long for us to get to this point. Before there was something called Obamacare, there was something called Hillarycare. And we worked really, really hard.

But I'll just be honest with you: I got beat by the insurance companies and the drug companies. They just knocked me down.

I love it when some people running for this office talk about how they're going to take on the special interests. I've done it, and I know you've got to be prepared, you've got to be ready, and you've got to do everything you can to beat them back.

So when we weren't successful, I got up off the floor and I said, "Okay, what can I do now?" And I worked with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which insures 8 million kids.

And I know how much that meant to those families, and I meet young people who come up and thank me because they didn't have reliable health care before that program.

That's why I was so happy when we passed the Affordable Care Act, because when you've been to as many places as I have in our country, and met so many people who did not have health insurance--they made too much money to qualify for Medicaid, they didn't work for people who offered insurance, they couldn't afford the individual insurance market--that's why 20 million people have signed up so far.

But we've got to get the costs down: the copays, and the deductibles, and the prescription drug costs. And I have a very clear idea about how we're going to do that.

Now, the Republicans want to repeal it. They never tell you what they'll replace it with--because they know we won't like it, because it's just going to go back to the way it was.

If you have a preexisting condition, you're out of luck. If you're a woman, your costs are going to be more than a man's. If you're a young person, you may not have that opportunity to stay on your family's policy until you're 26. Lifetime limits will come back.

So a lot of what we've changed to actually give people a chance to get the insurance to take care of themselves would be wiped out.

And my opponent wants to start all over again. And I can tell you, we do not need another big, contentious debate about health care. We need to make what we've got work really well, and improve it, and get the costs out of an upwards spiral.

Now, I want to mention two other things, because you don't hear presidential candidates talk about these two things, and I am really determined we're going to address both.

Number one: We need more treatment for mental health problems.

I was talking to Congressman Cartwright before I came out, and we were talking about running for office and I said, "You know, there is something that is so personal. I meet people--maybe I just meet them for a minute, sometimes I talk to them for 30 minutes--but people want to tell you what's on their minds, because they're hoping that you or somebody can help. And the two things I hear the most about--yes, of course, economics, knocking down those barriers--but mental health and addiction."

And so when I shake a hand of a mother, or father, or a sister, or brother, or child, and they say, "Please do something about mental health," I know it's personal. Maybe it affects them. Maybe it affects somebody they know or they are related to.

And I cannot tell you how many of those conversations have led to somebody saying, "Please do something about the heroin and opioid epidemic."

I had a young man come up and introduce himself and say he was going to vote for me. I said, "Well, do you mind if I ask why?" He goes, "Yeah," he said, "I'll tell you. I played football in high school. I got really hurt my senior year. I had to have surgery. When I got out of the surgery, I was in terrible pain, and the doctor prescribed opioids."

He said, "I'm not embarrassed to tell you I got hooked, and I couldn't shake it. But I couldn't keep getting the prescription filled, so I turned to heroin," he said.
He said, "I am so fortunate to be standing here, because about a year ago, I lost a really good friend who overdosed. We were in a car, we were doing heroin; he died." He said, "That just said to me I can't keep doing this, and so I went to get help."

But, he said, "It took me two months to get help." Because when you're ready to get help, there's not enough places to go to get help. And we are losing ... thousands and thousands of Americans of all age, but particularly young Americans under 40, and we have got to address this.

So I will do everything I can within our health care system to remove the stigma on mental health and to tackle the heroin and opioid epidemic.

Now, there's a lot of other important issues and concerns that we have to address in this campaign.

We've got to make sure that we have more affordable housing for people, particularly in our cities.

We've got to make sure that we have more of a diversified economy in our rural areas.

We've got to make sure we revitalize our cities, like Scranton and other places, to be magnets to attract more business.

We've got to make sure that we protect the safety net that exists.

So I will never let the Republicans privatize Social Security or Medicare. And I will never let them privatize the VA. We have to improve it and provide the services our veterans deserve to have. But we're not going to let the Koch brothers and the Republicans dismantle the VA.

We also have to be committed to do more to try to find ways where we are talking with confidence and optimism about the future, and I think that means we have to protect people's rights.

We have to protect a woman's right to make her own health care decisions.

We have to defend marriage equality, and end discrimination against the LGBT community.

We have to defend voting rights and end Citizens United, which is corrupting our political system.

We have to be focused on protecting workers' rights and the right to organize and bargain in a union.

Now, why is that? Because the American labor movement helped to create the American middle class.

I was meeting with some carpenters, and steamfitters, and electricians in Pittsburgh earlier today, and they were telling me about the kind of pressure that they're under by forces in the Republican party and others who are their allies to really erode the right to bargain.

And I will tell you this: You do not have to be a member of a union to want there to be unions doing that, because that raises the base for everybody.

And I'll tell you something else I will take on: I will take on the fight for commonsense gun safety measures.

And I want to be really clear about this--because I learned how to shoot a gun behind our cottage in Lake Winola, and I know how important gun ownership, and particularly hunting, is here in northeastern Pennsylvania.

And I want you to know that we can't ignore the Second Amendment--and we can't ignore that 33,000 people a year die from gun violence.

And I think we are smart enough to figure out how to do that. And the gun lobby doesn't want us to figure out how to do that. They just want to keep everybody all upset and agitated.

Well, at some point, they have to answer for that.

Responsible gun owners actually support what I am proposing: comprehensive background checks; closing the gun show loophole; closing the online loophole; closing what's called the Charleston loophole; ending the special protection that Congress voted for and gave to gun makers and sellers, which means that they don't ever have to change anything--it's the only industry in our country given that.

So there's a lot that could be done to make guns less accessible to kids. Of those 33,000, way too many are kids finding loaded guns, playing with guns, being able to pull that trigger. I mean, safety locks and other kinds of technology would save a lot of children's lives without infringing on one's Second Amendment rights.

So I'm well aware that I'm walking into the buzz saw here. I understand that. But I can tell you that when you have met as many victims of gun violence now as I have--because I have been visiting with people who have lost their loved ones for 25 years now--you either become totally insensitive, because it is too painful, or you say to yourself, "Hey, come on, we're better than this."

I was in Philadelphia the day before yesterday with mothers who have lost their children.

I was in Hartford, Connecticut yesterday on a panel with a mother from Hartford whose bright, really promising 20-year-old son was caught in some kind of crazy gang crossfire, just minding his own business.

I was there with the daughter of the principal of Sandy Hook Elementary School--who went, when she heard the gunshots, to see what she could do to stop it, and was murdered.

And I was there with the mother of one of the little girls who was murdered at Sandy Hook.

And when you meet those people, as I have, when you hear their stories, can you imagine sending off your six- or seven-year-old to go to school, maybe with a little backpack--and then getting a call that a man who was clearly disturbed, and should never have had access to military assault weapons, had walked in there and murdered 20 children and six adults?

And there are lots of stories like that. And we have to make this a voting issue, and responsible gun owners have to stand up and say, "This has nothing to do with my guns, my hunting, my sport shooting, my collecting."

So I want to do this, and I also want to make a pledge to you that I will do everything in my power to keep America safe, to defeat terrorists and anybody else who threatens our country or Americans anywhere.

And here's another area where Trump and Cruz are not just saying things that are offensive--which they are--they're saying things which are dangerous, and I want you to understand this: I went to 112 countries on your behalf as secretary of state. And I know we're not going to be able to defeat ISIS unless we have a coalition that includes Muslim-majority nations. That's how we're going to do it.

And when you have someone running for president who basically says we don't want any Muslims in our country, that sends a message. And it sends a message which makes the job of building that coalition a lot harder. And when you have Ted Cruz saying, "Hey, we need special police patrols in neighborhoods where Muslims live," how that would ever work nobody can explain, but nevertheless that's what he said; and the NYPD, which I worked with closely after 9/11, because I was a senator from New York on 9/11... they were just shaking their heads hearing what Cruz was saying.

And the chief of the department said, "Well, that's an idea that doesn't go anywhere: What will we do with the 1,000 Muslim American police officers that we have on the NYPD?" And the commissioner, Bill Bratton, who has as much experience in this area as anybody, said, "Ted Cruz doesn't know what the hell he's talking about."

So look, I know some of these lines get big applause responses in these rallies that Trump has, but stop and think: "Is that smart? Does that work? Does it help us? Does it protect us?" And the answer to all of that is, "No."

And then he went even further and basically said he didn't care if more countries got nuclear weapons. I mean, we have been working--Republicans and Democrats alike; it's something that Bob Casey works on--to prevent more countries from getting nuclear weapons and having a free-for-all that brought more nuclear weapons into the world.

So I'm telling you, I'm looking forward to debating them on the economy, and I'm looking forward to debating them on national security--because we're electing a Commander-in-chief as well as a president.

So let me just close by saying this. I think one of the jobs of the next president has to take on is unifying our country. We've got too much division.

It's fine to have a back-and-forth in a political campaign. That goes with the territory. But when the politics are over, when the campaigns are done, when the elections have been held, we've got to work together.

Diagnosing the problem is not enough. We need solutions that are going to bring people to the table and actually roll up our sleeves.

And I want you to know this about me: In every job I've ever had, I have worked hard to find common ground. I did it as first lady. I did it as a Senator. I did it as secretary of state--working across the aisle, finding ways to solve problems.

And I'll tell you something else: A lot of Republicans have nice things to say about me when I'm actually working on a job, and I will probably be publicizing all those nice things as we go forward.Now, when I'm actually running for a job, oh, my gosh, they're after me from sunup to way past sundown. I get that. And they call me names and all the rest of it. I don't mind.

Because what's really important is that I do what I tell you I will do, that I want you to hold me accountable for what I will do, that we will work together across every line that divides us, that we will create a future that our children and our grandchildren can have the same opportunities that should be the birthright of any American.

I am so grateful that I was born in this country. I am so grateful that I had parents who understood hard work. I am so grateful that I have a chance to try to do the same for my grandchild.

And I want to be the champion for all of America--but particularly for our children and our grandchildren. They deserve no less.

Let's go out and please vote on Tuesday in the primary. Thank you all so much.

In Hartford, Connecticut, Hillary Clinton spoke with family members of gun violence victims about her commitment to enact commonsense gun safety measures as president in Hartford, Connecticut.

Thank you. Wow. I am really honored to be here back in Hartford.

I am so grateful to each of these panelists, and so many in the audience, who--like me--are determined that we will do whatever we can to save lives in America.

On average, 90 people a day die from gun violence. That is 33,000 people a year. A year.

If anything else were killing 33,000 Americans a year, you can bet we would be fully mobilized, doing everything we possible could to save lives.

I'm really proud that your leaders here in Connecticut have shown the way. And I want to thank Governor Dan Malloy, who is here; Lieutenant Governor Nancy Wyman, who is here; your young mayor, who is a friend of my daughter's--which, of course, makes that even better for me--with his daughter, who is here. Thank you, Mayor Bronin, and thank you to everyone.

I want to also call out Reverend Henry Brown for his leadership as well. I know how hard it was to do what Connecticut's governor and legislature did after Sandy Hook.

So I am not here to make promises I can't keep. I am here to tell you I will use every single minute of every day, if I am so fortunate enough to be your president, looking for ways that we can save lives--that we can change the gun culture. It is just too easy for people to reach for a gun to settle their problems. It makes no sense.

And we can do this consistent with the Second Amendment. We can do this with the support of responsible gun owners. And that is exactly what we will do.

And I want you to know that I know I don't have all the answers. You will hear from the panelists today--both about their personal experiences, and about what they are doing to organize in their communities and across the nation to come up with commonsense gun safety reforms.

I'm advocating for comprehensive background checks, closing every one of the loopholes: the gun show loophole, the online loophole, what's called the Charleston loophole. Under the gun laws, you are entitled to get the gun you want to buy after three days whether or not the background check is completed.

The reason it's called the Charleston loophole is that the young killer of Charleston went to get that gun, came back three days later, the background check wasn't completed, but under the law the seller had no choice but to sell the gun. Twenty-four hours later they learned he never should have been able to buy the gun, because of his record.

But he took that gun, and he went to that venerable church in Charleston during Bible study, and he was invited in--and ended up murdering nine people.

I was in Philadelphia yesterday. There were 12 shootings in Philadelphia just over the weekend--four deaths.

A police officer, shot and injured.

And a four-year-old girl, killed when her father was playing with his loaded gun.

Because in that 33,000 deaths every year, there are homicides, to be sure, and there are suicides, and there are tragic, avoidable accidents, too many of them including children who find that loaded gun.

So it is with incredible gratitude to the people you're about to hear from that I ask you to please join us in this effort. I'm raising it everywhere I go, because we need a national movement.

They gun lobby is the most powerful lobby in Washington. You can talk about Wall Street, drug companies, insurance companies, big oil--they're all powerful, don't get me wrong.

Nobody is more powerful than the gun lobby, because they have figured out how to intimidate elected officials at all levels, who basically just stop thinking about this problem, because they're too scared to stand up to the NRA.

That's why what happened here in Connecticut really needs to be a model--to stand up, and then fight for what you have done politically, and convince a majority of people to stand with you.

That's what we have to do in Washington--and nationally. We have to turn this into a voting issue.

So we're now going to hear from the panelists, and I've asked each of them to talk about their personal story--but, also, to share their ideas about what could be done. We have a really good, diverse panel. And then, if we have time when we finish, I would love to hear from people in the audience, too.


At a "Get Out the Vote" event on Staten Island, Hillary Clinton discussed her plans to raise incomes and deliver results for all communities, keep Americans safe, and unite the country. Hillary also reaffirmed her pledge to work hard for every vote ahead of Tuesday's Democratic primary in New York, take nothing for granted, and make this campaign about the people she will fight for every day as president.

Thank you so much, Maxine. Didn't she do great? That is a terrific story. Wow, what a way to start. I am excited and happy to be back in Staten Island with all of you.

I had the greatest honor and delight in representing you for eight years. And it just is always so, I don't know, heartwarming for me to come here. This is a place of neighborhoods. This is a place where people still try to have Sunday dinner with their families. This is a place that holds each other up and supports each other. I saw that most tragically after 9/11, when we lost so many of our first responders, our firefighters, our police officers and others, and so many from families here in Staten Island.

So coming back, for me, is a way of saying thank you.

Thank you for the people here, what you stand for, who you are. I actually think Staten Island values are New York values, and New York values are American values.

I want to thank John Gulino, the Staten Island Democratic County chair; Debi Rose, councilmember; Matt Titone, assembly member; Mike Cusick, assembly member; your state senator, who I've had the privilege of knowing for a long time now, Diane Savino; and Public Advocate Tish James. Thank you all for being here with me.

I also want to thank this wonderful place for welcoming us here on this bright spring afternoon. Thank you for letting us be here and be part of Staten Island's history, which is so storied and impressive, and something that gives I think a lot of texture to this borough and what it stands for.

We have a big election on Tuesday--the Democratic primary. And I'll tell you what I see: I see this overall election, this 2016 presidential election, as one of the most consequential we've had in a long time.

Now, everybody who runs for office says something like that, but let me tell you what I mean: We are seeing a very distinct difference between the visions of what we can achieve as Americans, the values that should keep motivating and uniting us, and a divisive, mean-spirited rhetoric that sets people against each other.

Now, I am all for tough political battles. People who have different political views, arguing it out. When I ran in 2000, I didn't carry Staten Island. When I ran in 2006, I did--because we spent our time getting to know each other, listening to each other. So I've got no problem with people having political disagreements. That's in America's DNA, isn't it? But what I absolutely worry about is deliberate efforts to set Americans against each other.

That's especially important in this city and state, because we are a diverse group of folks. We don't all look alike. We don't all sound alike. We don't all worship alike. But we're united in our own efforts to get ahead and stay ahead and help others along the way.

So when we have candidates running for president on the Republican side who are deliberately inciting divisiveness--who are insulting whole groups of Americans; who are saying things like "build the walls," not the bridges, the walls; make it impossible for some people to come to this country because of their religion, a country founded on religious liberty--when we see that, it really bothers me.

Because I begin to think: We are the most extraordinary invention in all of human history--this democracy of ours that has kept going longer than any other anywhere, this nation of immigrants with Lady Liberty in the harbor welcoming people, this place where opportunity is still available. Just as you heard Maxine say, every one of us could tell a story of a hard time, me included--every single one of us. But America has always had our back. Are we perfect? No. But are we better than anywhere else and are we already great? The answer is yes.

I am sick and tired of people running for president who view our country through a negative lens.

Part of what we have to do every election is actually look at our problems and figure out how we're going to solve them. It is not enough to diagnose the problem. A lot of people can do that. We need people who are going to roll up our sleeves and get to work on solutions. That is what I tried to do for eight years as your senator.

When Maxine mentioned the Children's Health Insurance Program--I helped to start that when I was first lady because, call it boring, but I think it's important to actually help people if you hold a public trust, and that's what I've tried to do. And that's what I will continue to do if you give me the honor of serving as your president.

I know what it's like to be knocked down. I understand that completely. And I understand, too, what it is to get yourself back up--like Maxine did, and like I bet so many of you in this crowd have done.

The question is not whether you get knocked down. It's whether you stay down. And for every problem we've got in America right now, there are solutions.

So I'm done with the hand-wringing and all the negative talk. I am done with people saying America's best days are behind us. I'm done with that.

Because here's what I see: When I ran for senate, the people of New York took a chance on me. I will never forget that. You had no basis for doing that.

Well, it turned out pretty well. But it was within my first year serving as your senator that 9/11 happened, and the necessity of pulling together drove everything we did. We had a Republican mayor, we had a Republican governor, we had a Republican president. I did not for one minute stop and say to myself, "Well, I don't know. Can we work together?" How absurd is that? We were facing a crisis of unbelievable proportions. We had 3,000 people murdered--and we pulled together. Politics was totally left behind.

I'll tell you, I criticize George W. Bush. I criticize him because I didn't like the way that he took the economy he inherited from my husband--23 million new jobs and incomes going up for everybody--and drove us into a ditch. I didn't like that. But I'll tell you, when we needed him--when Chuck Schumer and I were in that Oval Office on the Thursday after 9/11, and he asked us what we needed, and we were just the two of us, with the two senators from Virginia, because the Pentagon had been attacked, and I said, "We need $20 billion, Mr. President, to rebuild New York, to take care of families," we didn't yet know about all the health consequences, which I then later spent much of my Senate years dealing with, but we said, "We need $20 billion."--he said, "You've got it."

And despite intense Republican pressure to back down, he never did. So I publicly say, "Thank you, President George W. Bush, for making sure we got the money that we needed to rebuild our city."

I have no time for people who are partisan for the sake of being partisan, who point fingers from whatever side of the political divide. America is always challenged to move forward, to maintain that opportunity and freedom that is at the core of who we are. That shouldn't be partisan.

We can--again, we can disagree about the best way to create good jobs with rising incomes, the best way to ensure that every child in every zip code has a good teacher and a good school, the best way to make sure everybody gets the health care they need, the best way to make sure Social Security is there for future generations. I have no problem with a good debate.

What I don't understand is folks who think it's their way or no way, people who believe that only they have access to the truth.

Well, as your secretary of state, I went to 112 countries, and I'll tell you what: A lot of those places were run by dictators, authoritarian regimes, theocracies that thought they had a monopoly on the truth. You don't want to go there; you sure don't want to live there. But we have to remind ourselves every election is what's at stake. And what's at stake is whether or not we're going to keep making progress together.

So that's why I've laid out plans, because I want you to know what I intend to do--plans for getting more jobs, infrastructure jobs, advanced manufacturing jobs, combating climate change with clean, renewable energy jobs.

And some people--look, I do understand some people actually make fun of that. They say, "Oh, there she goes with her plans. Why doesn't she just get up and rant and rail and"--well, you know, I like to do that every so often.

But I want you to know what I think we can do together. I've set some big goals for clean, renewable energy. Let's deploy half a billion more solar panels and have enough clean energy to provide electricity to every home in America in 10 years.

And let's do more to help small business. Staten Island is a borough of small businesses; let's do more to help small businesses. It's out of small businesses that we're going to get about two-thirds of the new jobs, and I am proud that New York has led the way with a minimum wage increase, so people who work full time are not mired in poverty.

And I do want to finally guarantee equal pay for women's work. I got to tell you, this--this, of course, is a women's issue, but it's not just a women's issue; it's a family issue. If you have a wife, a mother, a sister, a daughter who is working and is not being treated fairly when it comes to pay and benefits in the workplace, the family suffers, the economy suffers.

Now, I've been shopping my entire life--that's a long time--and I've never gotten up to the cashier at the supermarket or at the department store or anywhere else where they say, "Okay, you're a white woman, you only have to pay 78 cents on the dollar;" or "You're a black woman, you only have to pay 68 cents;" or "You're a Latina woman, you only have to pay 58 cents." That's not the way it works.

People who work and do the job should get equal pay, and that should not even be debatable.

And I am absolutely committed to improving education, because, as you heard Maxine, it is still the pathway. But I want to make a couple of points that probably you haven't heard about education.

First, we need early childhood education, and I'm glad New York City is providing universal pre-k for the kids here. And the early studies show that it's making a difference for a lot of kids. We need to do that. Every child should be prepared to learn when he or she gets to school.

And then once we get elementary and secondary school, I want to work with and support our teachers who are doing that important job for all of us. There has just been too much scapegoating, too much criticism, and in fact, I think that we've got work to do to make sure we are going to recruit and keep the teachers of the next generation. And it will be essential if we're going to be competitive in the world.

Thirdly, we're going to make college affordable. I have a plan for debt-free tuition. And I do want to make community college free, because there's a lot of skills you can acquire in community to go immediately to work.

And I really want to stress two other points. One, not everybody has to go to college. There are a lot of good jobs that we need filled by people. We've got to provide the apprenticeship programs, and I want to boost what labor unions are doing to provide more apprenticeship operations. There are currently about 1.2 million jobs in this country for machinists and welders and tool and die makers and other skilled labor. And very often, these are good union jobs, which is at the core of the middle class. So let's do more to encourage more people to go that route.

And I have a plan to help you refinance your student debt. If you can refinance your mortgage or your car payment, why can't you refinance your student debt? And we're going to make it possible for you to do that. We're going to get the cost down and we're going to put a date certain where the payments end. Because honestly, it should be an investment in our future that we are helping young people get their education. I do not think the federal government should be making money off of lending money to send young people to college.

And we're going to build on the Affordable Care Act. Before there was something called Obamacare, there was something called Hillarycare. And I really tried hard and I got my head handed to me by the drug companies and the insurance companies. I love it when all these other folks, including my opponent in the primary, talks about taking on the interests and--where were you? I mean, really, we were fighting tooth and nail trying to get universal health care coverage passed.

But we got to improve it. We've got to get the costs down--out-of-pocket costs, deductibles, copays. We need more competition. And we have to go after--and win this time--against the drug companies to get drug costs under control.

I am excited about all the work we can do together. And I know that it's not easy. I understand that. But anybody asking for your vote should be able to tell you what they want to do to meet the test of, can you improve people's lives? Can you provide a positive difference? And the second test is, can you keep us safe?

Now, maybe we take that more seriously here in New York, but we should. And we are going to do everything we can to keep America safe. And I am so proud of the way New York pulled together after 9/11, and has stayed focused, to make sure that we do everything possible to protect ourselves.

That's why it really bothers me when you hear Trump talking about no Muslims coming to the United States.

We have to defeat the terrorists. That is my goal. And how are we going to do that? Well, we're going to do it in coalition with other nations--European nations, Arab nations, some of whom are actually Muslim nations.

I know how hard it is to put together a coalition because I put together the coalition that brought Iran to the negotiating table, including Russia and China. It took me a year and a half. We got it done, and then we negotiated a deal. And I can tell you this--I think it's kind of common sense: It's harder to put a coalition together if you've got somebody running for president of the United States who insults the religion of the nations you're trying to get into your coalition.

And it's very clear people around the world are paying close attention to this election. I'm getting a lot of incoming questions and messages like, "What is going on?" And I say, "Oh, don't worry about it. The American people will never vote for that."

And then I cross my fingers and cross my heart and pray to God.

And then Ted Cruz comes along and has the brilliant idea--exactly, the perfect Staten Island response to the mention of his name.

So Ted Cruz comes along and says, "Oh, we need special police patrols of Muslim neighborhoods in America." Now, I think the two best responses to that idiocy--which actually is not only offensive, it's dangerous, because we need everybody to report anything they think is suspicious; that's how we keep ourselves safe--so the two best responses: Number one was one of the chiefs of the force of the NYPD who--I lived his understatement--he said, "Well, so what am I supposed to do with the 1,000 American Muslim police officers?" And then Bill Bratton's comment: "He does not know what the hell he's talking about."

So in order to keep us safe, as any president must do, we need to have close connections with everybody. And everybody needs to be encouraged: You see something suspicious, you hear something suspicious, you call, NYPD, FBI, or wherever you might be in the country. That's what we've been doing, and we've got to keep doing it. And we don't need divisive rhetoric that excludes and marginalizes any community.

The third big test that is facing the next president is how are you going--how are you going to unify our country? Now, I'll tell you my experience, both as first lady and senator and as secretary of state. There's nothing easy about doing this. But I will go anywhere, any time, to meet with anyone to find common ground.

When we talk about the CHIP program, that was--that was because we got Democrats and Republicans to work together. And 8 million children, like Maxine's child, get the health insurance they need, regardless of the challenges facing their families.

When I was your senator, I told you we had to work with Republicans, and I gladly did so to make sure we got what we needed.

And then, as I began to hear from firefighters, and police officers, and construction workers, and EMTs, and volunteers--people who had run toward danger, who had stayed there, some of whom were assigned there, some of whom were part of the cleanup, and after months of exposure to the toxins they began to suffer; you know that, there are people you know, or you know somebody who knows, right here on Staten Island--and so I went and I said to the Bush administration, "In this case I'm not happy about it. Something wrong is going on, and we need to help."

And they denied it. Nothing wrong with the air. No problems. I held a hearing downtown near the ferry and had people come in and tell me their stories, have experts come in. I knew there was something wrong. And we began to work, and we built a coalition. And finally we got the Zadroga Act passed, and finally we made sure that we're not turning our backs on anybody.

Anybody who was there, anybody who stayed there, anybody who worked there: We will never turn our backs. And certainly, as president, if I'm so fortunate enough to be there, you can count on that. We will continue to provide whatever health care is needed.

And what I have found over all these years is you just gotta get up every day trying to see whether you can find somebody who will work with you.

Actually, when I have these jobs, Republicans say nice things about me. Yeah, they do. I'm a good colleague. I'm easy to work with. Because I tell them, look. I will seek common ground, but I'll stand my ground. I think that's the combination that you want in an elected representative.

So that's what I'm interested in--all of these contentious problems. What are we going to do to get comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship? What are we going to do to take on the gun lobby to get comprehensive gun safety measures to keep guns out of the hands of people who shouldn't have them in the first place?

These are contentious issues. I make no bones about that. They're contentious. But they don't get solved by people just yelling at each other. You got to come together. You got to sit down. You've got to spend the hours listening and then working toward some kind of solution.

That's what I promise you. I'm telling you what I will do. You can go to my website and read about it.

I'm also telling you everything I've proposed I will pay for without--and I'm the only candidate who has said this--I will not raise taxes on the middle class at all, period.

There is plenty of money. There's plenty of money in rich people's pockets. And it's time they started paying their share to support this country that has made them successful in the first place.

So I'm telling you what I will do, how I will go about getting it done--and I want you to hold me accountable. I will be coming back to Staten Island when I am your president.

But I can't do any of this without your help.

Tuesday's a big, big primary, because we want to send a message that New York wants the kind of future that is going to be positive, that's going to produce good results for people.

People willing to work hard should be rewarded. We need to have a country again where we believe in the promise of America, where we deliver on the potential of every child.

If you will go out and vote for me on Tuesday, I will fight for you during this campaign and I will fight for you every single day in the White House!

Thank you and God bless you, Staten Island!

Hillary Clinton delivered remarks on her "Breaking Every Barrier Agenda" and laid out her plan to fight for environmental justice at the National Action Network's 25th Anniversary National Convention in New York.

Good afternoon, everyone! I am delighted to be back here, and I want to send greetings to everyone, particularly to Reverend Sharpton and to the board, to Reverend Richardson and all of those who work with him, to Melanie Campbell, to my longtime friend Hazel Dukes, and to all who are gathered here today. It is wonderful to be back at the National Action Network for the 25th anniversary of your work on the frontlines of our nation's continuing struggle for civil rights.

You stand up and always have against gun violence, advocate for criminal justice reform, help young people find jobs, hold corporations accountable, and in a million ways, lift up voices that too often go unheard.

So for me, it's great being back in New York and wonderful being here. And I appreciate Reverend Sharpton introducing the mothers and other loved ones of those whom we we have lost, people who are joined in a "club of grief" that none of us ever want to be members of. And I am grateful for their witness and their extraordinary commitment to criminal justice reform, to common sense gun reforms, and so much else.

You know, on Monday, at a celebration of Jackie Robinson, who played his first game for the Brooklyn Dodgers 69 years ago this week, Reverend Sharpton said, "America was never the same." Well, I think it's fair to say that holds true for the National Action Network as well.

And I want you to imagine what Jackie Robinson would say if he could see us now. The decades since he put down his glove have brought remarkable progress: the rise of the black middle class, the tremendous leadership of African Americans in all walks of life--in business, in law, to government, science, the arts, all the professions, and, of course, Barack and Michelle Obama in the White House.

But, as you know so well, the last few years also have laid bare deep fault lines in America. They've revealed how frayed our bonds of trust and respect have become.

Despite our best efforts and our highest hopes, America's long struggle with racism is far from finished.

And we are seeing that in this election.

When the frontrunner for the Republican nomination was asked in a national television interview to disavow David Duke and other white supremacists supporting his campaign, he played coy. This is the same Donald Trump who led the insidious "birther" movement to delegitimize President Obama. He has called Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers. He wants to ban all Muslims from entering the United States. And the list goes on.

And not to be outdone by his primary rival, Ted Cruz would treat Muslim Americans like criminals and religiously profile their neighborhoods.

So, ugly currents that lurked just below the surface of our politics have burst into the open. And everyone sees this bigotry for what it is. Therefore, it is up to all of us to repudiate it.

Here in New York, we don't all look the same, sound the same, or worship the same. But we have learned over the years that America's problems won't be solved by building walls and dividing our country between "us" and "them." We know our diversity is a strength, not a weakness. And New York represents the best of American values, despite what some on the other side have said and that we have to constantly challenge ourselves to stand up and face all that we still have to overcome.

Now of course, the problem goes far deeper than Donald Trump or Ted Cruz.

More than half a century after Rosa Parks sat, and Dr. King marched, and John Lewis bled, race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind.

There's something wrong, my friends, when the median wealth for black families is a tiny fraction of the median wealth for white families, when African Americans are still more likely to be denied a mortgage.

Something's wrong when black kids get arrested for petty crimes but white kids who do the same things don't.

Something's wrong when gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young black men, outstripping the next nine causes of death combined.

Something's wrong when so many black parents are burying their children.

Imagine if a white baby in parts of our country was twice as likely to die before her first birthday than a black baby. Imagine the outcry and the resources that would flood in to save those babies.

These are not only problems of economic inequality. They are also problems of racial inequality.

And it is time we face up to the reality of systemic racism in all of its forms.

And once we do, we are called to come together to break down all the barriers that still hold African-Americans back from fully participating in our economy and our society--and together, to build ladders of opportunity and empowerment in their place.

As I have said many times, white Americans need to do a much better job of listening when African-Americans talk about the seen and unseen barriers you face every day.

We need to recognize our privilege and practice humility, rather than assume our experiences are everyone else's experiences.

We need to try, as best we can, to walk in your shoes, to imagine what it would be like to sit down our son or daughter down and have "the talk," or if people followed us around stores, or locked their car doors when we walked past.

This is a discipline that I have recognized and tried to practice in my own life ever since my Methodist youth minister took our Methodist youth fellowship group from our nearly-all white suburb to worship with black and Latino children in Chicago and to hear Dr. King speak.

And then, in my first semester at law school, I met a woman named Marian Wright Edelman. Marian was actually here with me the last time I spoke at the National Action Network in 2007. Many of you know her story.

She was the first black woman admitted to the Mississippi bar, a lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund in Jackson, a friend of Dr. King's and Robert Kennedy's before they were assassinated, altogether a remarkable leader. Until I met Marian, I wasn't clear how to channel my faith and commitment to social justice to make both a living and a difference in the world. I went to work for her at the Children's Defense Fund. She sent me to her home state of South Carolina to investigate the problem of black teenagers being incarcerated in adult jails.

And when I look back at everything else I've done, whether it was going undercover in Alabama as a young woman to help expose segregated academies and strip them of their tax exemptions, or running a legal clinic at the University of Arkansas to represent prison inmates and poor families, it was all part of the same mission: to fight injustice and even the odds for those who have the odds stacked against them in life and in our society.

That was true when, as first lady, I worked with both Republicans and Democrats in Congress to create the Children's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million children.

It was true when, as the senator from New York, I worked with parents and doctors and community leaders to take on the epidemic of children's asthma in Harlem and the Bronx.

It was true when I worked with the organization 100 Black Men to create the Eagle Academy, a public school here in New York City whose mission is serving young black and Latino men.

Or when I joined partners in New York, the congressional delegation, like Charlie Rangel and Greg Meeks to bring jobs and investment to underserved neighborhoods and worked with leaders including my great friend, the late Stephanie Tubbs Jones, to protect voting rights.

It was true when I went to David Dinkins's annual conference at Columbia University last year and gave the first policy speech of my presidential campaign about reforming our criminal justice system and ending the era of mass incarceration.

So what I have tried to do, what I intend to keep doing with your help, is to refuse to accept as normal the fact that black men today are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police, charged with crimes, and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses.

And we have seen the toll that takes on families torn apart by excessive incarceration and children growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty. I don't claim to have all the answers, but I do know how important it is that we address these issues.

And I applaud the National Action Network for being the champion of this cause and helping to build momentum for reform.

As your senator, I fought against racial profiling and the disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine.

As your president, I'll work with you to lead a national effort for end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system, and I will appoint an attorney general who will continue the courageous work of Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch, two New Yorkers!

Now everyone, everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law.

So we have to rebuild the bonds of trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve--and stop the tragedy of black men and women being killed by police or dying in custody.

Every day, here in New York and all over America, there are many police officers inspiring trust and confidence, putting themselves on the line to save lives.

So let's learn from those police and departments that are doing it right and apply those lessons across the country, and make sure the Justice Department has the resources to hold them accountable when they do it wrong.

Reforming our criminal justice system, though, is just the beginning of our work. Over the course of my campaign, including in February at the Schomburg Center in Harlem, I have been laying out a comprehensive agenda for equity and opportunity for black communities.

Mass incarceration is just one part of a broader set of interlocking challenges, because years of underinvestment and neglect have hollowed out many predominantly African-American communities. There aren't enough jobs, and poverty persists from generation to generation. Not enough families, still today, have access to the education their children they deserve, the affordable housing they need to live in. Infrastructure has been allowed to crumble, even if it was ever built before.

A recent report found the economic impact of widespread inequality in education to be the equivalent of a "permanent national recession." That's a pretty good description of what it's like to live in a community that's been repeatedly left out and left behind. And reports of economic recovery, which are real, because I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch the Republicans put us in in the first place, has given us a strong foundation to go further.

So, now we need a truly comprehensive approach to how we lift everybody up. That's why I am proposing a major, $125 billion "Breaking Every Barrier Agenda" to revitalize and empower communities of color and places where unemployment and poverty remain stubbornly high--from inner cities to poor rural areas, from Appalachia to Indian Country.

The pillars of this agenda match many of the challenges that the National Action Network has also taken on.

It has to start with a strategy to create more good jobs. So my plan devotes $20 billion specifically to help young people find work and $5 billion to help people who have paid their debt to society find jobs and support when they get out of prison.

We're going to make more strategic investments in transit and infrastructure to connect black communities to areas where good-paying jobs actually are.

On Sunday, I was in Baltimore, where the NAACP is fighting the cancellation of a much-needed rail line that would have made it easier for African Americans in low-income neighborhoods to access economic opportunities in other parts of the city.

They say transportation is a civil rights issue--and I agree.

And we're going to support black entrepreneurs, especially black women, who are a powerful entrepreneurial force to get the capital they need to start and grow small businesses, because that's where a majority of the jobs will come from.

We'll invest in education and apprenticeships. And it is outrageous that 60-plus years after Brown v. Board of Education, our public schools are more segregated by race and income than they were in 1968.

We have to replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline, because in America, every child should have a good teacher and a good school, no matter what ZIP code they live in.

And families, families need safe, affordable places to live. Black and Latino families are disproportionately affected by the crisis of affordable housing in New York and other cities across America. That's forced thousands of people out of the neighborhoods where they lived for years.

Meanwhile, public housing is under enormous pressure. Over the past 15 years, federal funding for the New York City Housing Authority has declined by nearly 30 percent.

So as part of our "Breaking Every Barrier Agenda," we're going to make affordable housing a priority. We will defend and expand the current supply of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits. We'll boost funding for Section 8 vouchers and give recipients more choice in deciding where to live. And because African-American homeownership has long been one of the surest ways to fund and build wealth, we'll match up to $10,000 in savings for a down payment.

Now there's one more part of this agenda--the reverend asked me to be substantive. Well, I'm giving it to you. Because, you know what? When somebody asks for your vote, they should tell you what they're going to do, not what they hope to do. And they should tell you to hold them accountable, which I want you to. Because it is important that we do this together. I want to just talk very briefly about an issue that doesn't get enough attention. That is the challenge of environmental justice.

Now, we all know what happened in Flint. Children drinking and bathing in toxic water for nearly two years because their governor wanted to save a little money. Parents held up bottles of brown, murky water and said, something's wrong here, but their concerns were dismissed and belittled.

Well, let me tell you, Flint is not alone. There are a lot of Flints across our country where children are exposed to polluted air, unhealthy water, and chemicals that can increase cancer risk.

And like Flint, they tend to be places that are home to poor people and people of color.

What happened to Flint would never have happened in a wealthy suburb of Detroit.

It is no coincidence that black children are twice as likely as white children to suffer from asthma, three times more likely to be hospitalized, and five times more likely to die from the disease.

Or that children of color are more likely than white kids to suffer lead poisoning, which can lead to lifelong learning challenges and even behavioral problems.

It is no coincidence that nearly half of all Latinos in the United States live in places where the air does not even meet EPA public health standards.

Or that race is the single biggest factor determining whether you live near a toxic site, from "asthma alley" in the Bronx to "cancer alley" in Louisiana.

And you know what--climate change is going to make these burdens even heavier.

So today, I'm announcing a new plan to fight for environmental justice across America.

When President Obama and I both were in the Senate, we worked together on legislation aimed at getting harmful lead out of child care facilities, classrooms and homes with children. Now I want to set an ambitious national goal to eliminate lead as a major public threat within five years. Some say, "Well, that's awfully ambitious." I say, if we put our minds to it, we can get it done. Let's set that goal, and then let's get everybody moving forward to achieve it. We know how to do the work, all we need is the will.

And let's push polluters to pay for cleaning up hundreds of thousands of toxic sites across America. When I was in Senate, I helped pass a law to clean up brownfields and worked to bring together developers, environmentalists, and local leaders from across New York to redevelop blighted properties. Let's take that work nationwide.

Let's reduce air pollution and combat climate change by investing in clean energy and clean transportation.

And oh, by the way, we'll put a lot of people to work. As part of a major national infrastructure strategy, let's protect health and safety by repairing not only what we can see but what we can't, like the failing water systems, run-down public housing, and crumbling schools. Right now in the Detroit public schools, there are children in classrooms breathing the toxins from mold and there are rodents sharing their space.

And even here in New York, we know we've got problems. Let's do more, like Philadelphia did, when it installed green roofs and porous pavements to keep sewers from backing up into low-income neighborhoods.

Now you don't have to look too far to see what this means for people. A woman named Michelle Holmes is here with us today.

She's lived in the Polo Grounds Towers in Harlem for decades. She does daily battle with roaches, vermin, and other pests. And then the chemicals used to exterminate them cause other problems. Her family has frequent asthma attacks that often land them in the hospital. And then there's the mold--brown and green spots on the bathroom ceiling. No one should have to live like that in America.

Every child and every family in America deserves clean air to breathe, clean water to drink, and a safe and healthy place to live. This a justice issue. It's a civil rights issue. And as president, it will be a national priority for us.

So my friends, throughout this campaign, and then as president, I'm going to keep fighting to break down all the barriers holding back every American. My door will always be open to you. You will always have a friend and a partner in the White House.

See, I believe that Democrats have a special obligation. If we're going to ask African Americans to vote for us, we can't take you or your vote for granted.

We can't just show up at election time and say the right things and think that's enough.

We can't start building relationships a few weeks before a vote.

We have to demonstrate a sustained commitment to building opportunity, creating prosperity and righting wrongs--not just every two or four years, not just when the cameras are on and people are watching, but every single day. I have worked on these causes all my adult life. I'm going to keep going at it no matter what.

And I want to close today by paying tribute to some extraordinary women who are here with us--who inspire me every day to fight harder, work longer, and never, ever give up.

You heard their names, when Reverend Sharpton introduced them, but I've gotten to know some of them personally, and have had the great honor of spending time with them.

Gwen Carr from here in New York, the mother of Eric Garner, who was stopped for selling loose cigarettes on the street and ended up dead.

Sybrina Fulton, the mother of Trayvon Martin, shot and killed in Florida just for walking through the development where his own father lived.

Valerie Bell, mother of Sean Bell, shot and killed by police here in New York on the morning of his wedding day.

And Nicole Bell, his fiancee who would have married Sean that fateful day.

All these women and the others who are here, the family members of those who have been lost, not only by police action but by gun violence of any kind, anywhere. The man who killed Trayvon Martin should have never had a gun in the first place. All of these women and other family members have endured unimaginable pain. I look at them and wonder whether I would have been that strong and resilient.

Their grief is unimaginable but they have not been broken. Instead, they are channeling their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement.

They are standing up for criminal justice reform and they are standing up against the epidemic of gun violence that takes on average, 90 people a day. That is 33,000 people a year killed by guns in America every year. Now, my opponent, who will be speaking to you tomorrow, and I don't see this the same way. But, I think this is a national emergency, and I'm going to do everything I can to take on the gun lobby and to try to save lives, the lives of the children of women like this and the sisters and the brothers and the daughters and the sons of so many others.

And I will work as hard as I can as your president to keep faith with them for police reform and demanding a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice.

They're living what the Scripture tells us: "Let us not grow weary in doing good, for in due season we shall reap if we do not lose heart."

These are words to live by, and I believe these are words to govern by. Think of the future we can build if we work together and don't grow weary doing good. The men on both sides of me have not grown weary. This organization has not grown weary. It is our obligation and our challenge not to grow weary either until every American has the dignity, the justice, and the opportunity they deserve.

That's the future we should want for our children and our country. That's why I'm asking for your support in this election, starting on the primary on Tuesday. And that's why we will roll up our sleeves and we will get results that will make us proud to be standing together for the kind of future that every child in this country deserves to have. Thank you, and God bless you.

At the 44th Annual New York State United Teachers Representative Assembly, Hillary Clinton talked about the importance of ensuring every child has access to quality public education and laid out her plan to support teachers as president.

It's great to be before this representative assembly, to have a chance to talk about the issues affecting public education. Thank you Karen, Madam President, for that introduction. It is great to be here with all of you. I want also to single out someone who came with me tonight, a great champion of so many causes, Congresswoman Louise Slaughter.

You all know she is such a great fighter. ... Her absolute commitment to the issues that matter to us and to your work in America have really put her head and shoulders above anybody else. She's been just a great advocate. And for those of you in Rochester, in her congressional district, please send her back in November!

So it's great to be here in Rochester. It does feel like old times.

As your senator, I visited here probably more than 40 times, worked hand-in-hand with local leaders and businesses and schools to create jobs in clean energy and advanced manufacturing, connected farmers upstate with restaurants downstate, so people in Brooklyn and Queens could eat Red Jacket apples and drink Finger Lakes wine. It was a terrific adventure, and I appreciate Karen welcoming me home. New York took a chance on me back in 2000, and I'll never forget it.

And here today, I want to say from the outset that I'm with you. I will fight for you, I will stand up for you, and together we will do what we must to make sure public education [inaudible].

Like you, I think hard about the questions that we are facing. For example, how can we do better for the millions of children living in poverty in America? This is the first time I'm aware of, historically, that we've had a majority of poor children in our public schools.

How can we do better for the moms and dads working harder and harder every day just to get by?

How can we do better when the jobs of the future will require creativity and ingenuity and collaboration--yet our education system is increasingly focused on test preparation?

I know that our teachers and schools do amazing things for our kids every day. But I also know you can't do it alone. You need your country to have your backs, too.

If I'm fortunate enough to be your president starting January 20, 2017, I will have your backs. You can count on that.

I want every teacher, principal, parent and student to know you will have a partner in the White House. And that goes for everyone who helps our students succeed: teachers' aides, social workers, guidance counselors, school nurses, speech and occupational therapists, everyone who helps our students achieve all that they're capable of.

These issues are not new to me. When I got out of law school I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund. I did it because I was inspired by the woman who started CDF, Marian Wright Edelman, and I did it because I wanted to use my legal education on behalf of kids. And I got off to a fast start: I was sent to Alabama to investigate segregated academies, to make the case against them getting tax-exempt status as they pulled people out of public schools, taking the resources and limiting the books, the shelves off the walls.

When my husband was governor of Arkansas, he asked me to chair a commission to improve education in our state. We obviously knew our schools were in bad shape. In fact one expert said Arkansas had perhaps the worst schools in the country. To me, that sounds like an emergency. So I went to work, had great support from people across the state, held hearings in every county. Thousands of people turned out. We discovered that many schools couldn't even offer the basics, like chemistry or foreign languages--forget about art or music.

So we worked to come up with a plan to get more schools the resources they needed. We fought hard to get it passed by the legislature. And a few years later, that same expert said that Arkansas had raised school standards dramatically, teachers had received desperately needed raises, and that we had done something which was hard to do--which is to change the attitude of a whole state toward the importance of education.

Now, the reason I am telling you this history is because the lesson was clear to me: We've got to come together and fight together to give our schools and teachers the resources you need to succeed. And we've got to convince the whole country once again to support public education.

Every child in this country deserves a world-class education, with good schools and effective, well-supported teachers--no matter what ZIP code they live in. Because when we invest in education, we're investing in our country's future, and in creating a stronger economy for all of us.

I have a plan for how we should strengthen public education. It comes from consultation with AFT and NEA. It boils down to TLC: teaching, learning and community.

I actually think our teachers and students could use a little TLC.

Tonight I want to focus on the "T"--teaching.

We've known for years that nothing in school matters more than an effective teacher. Now America is asking more of our educators than ever before.

You're asked to prepare our kids for a competitive economy, adapt your instruction to meet the diverse needs of your students, stay on top of new technologies and pedagogies, and adjust to a sea of reforms at the local, state and national levels.

We look to you to fill in gaps that we as a country have long neglected--like giving low-income kids, English-language learners, and kids with disabilities the support they need to thrive.

And we ask you to help make right everything from poverty and homelessness, to child health disparities, to the legacy of racial inequities stretching back centuries. These are major, complicated issues--and they should not be dumped on all you, yours alone to bear.

One of my main goals as president will be to launch a national campaign to modernize and elevate the profession of teaching. To reach out to encourage more talented young people to become teachers. To reach out and encourage more talented mid-career professionals to do the same.

As senator, I fought to pass legislation to recruit and train outstanding teachers, including veterans, because I believe there are many dedicated people out there who join your ranks to serve our students well and be good colleagues to you, if given the chance.

Recruiting and retaining effective teachers starts, however, with something very basic: raising teacher pay. I know I don't need to tell any of you, but teachers make nearly 15 percent less than other college graduates in America. That adds up to a lot of money over a career. So if we believe, as I do--and then we give lip service to--that teachers are professionals and that you do something valuable, we should pay you like we really believe it.

We should use other incentives, too--like student debt forgiveness. I supported this as your senator because I don't think it's right that our future educators are finishing college loaded down with debt.

That, combined with low pay, means too many teachers are taking second or even third jobs just to get by and support their families. It shouldn't be that hard to make it as a teacher. That's also why I supported a tax deduction for teachers who spend their own money on classroom supplies--which is pretty much every teacher I know.

And while we're at it--at a time when the majority of teachers are women, we need to stand up and fight for equal pay for women.

It's not just a woman's issue, although of course it is. This is a family issue. You have a mother, wife, sister, daughter, who are in the workforce--the last I checked, there was no discount for being a woman when you checked out at the supermarket. I don't think this happens, where a cashier looks and says, "Well, you're a white woman, so you only have to pay 77 cents to the dollar. Or you're an African American woman, you only have to pay 68 cents on the dollar. Or you're a Latina woman, you only have to pay 58 cents on the dollar."

There is no gender discount, and it's time that we start treating equal pay as [inaudible].

I also support raising the minimum wage nationwide, and I applaud the big step taken under Governor Cuomo's leadership to raise the minimum wage. Now, raising the minimum wage is a big deal in America. There's more work to be done, I grant you that. I can point to California and New York, which have just raised the minimum wage, and be able to say, "We are doing it, so let's do it for everybody."

Let's raise the minimum wage for everybody.

We also have to convince decision makers at every level to respect and help to raise your professional standing in the eyes of your fellow citizens.

You know the research and the comparisons and analysis--in countries like Finland and Singapore that score high in the international rankings, when you look behind the numbers what you find is this, it's so obvious: Their teachers are treated with respect as the professionals that they are. It's actually pretty obvious, isn't it? You treat somebody with respect, you give people the support they need to do this critical job, then you're going to see how the whole system's lifted up.

We've got to do a better job of preparing and supporting teachers. I want all teachers, at every stage of their careers, to know they'll be able to keep learning, keep improving, keep innovating. That goes for administrators, too. As senator, I worked with both UFT and NYSUT, along with AFT and NEA, to pass legislation to train and support not only teachers but principals, so that you have a whole-team concept that would make the difference for lots of students.

And supporting teachers means facing tough issues like over-testing. Many frustrated parents and teachers are saying enough is enough.

Tests should get back to their original purpose--to get information to teachers and parents so we can know how our kids are doing, and work together to help them improve. Let's keep working to find a fair, balanced approach to testing, so our kids learn what they need to compete in a global economy, and you have the tools to help them get there.

Everything that I'm talking about today is pretty straightforward, for those of you that are educators. But I know it can only be done in partnership with you.

So I am asking you to work with me, just as I have worked as your senator. I want your advice. I want your constructive criticism. I want to be held accountable. I want to support you in fighting for your students and your profession.

That goes for the "L" and "C" portions of TLC, too.

L is for learning. Let's build off what works. Let's go where the research and best practices point us.

You know, I have a dear friend who just retired from teaching. And I asked her one time, "What are the biggest differences from the time you started nearly 40 years ago to now that you're retired?" She made two great comments, I thought.

One, she said, "When I started, the children really understood that I was the authority figure. I would stand in front of the class, and, you know, there's the occasional kid that would misbehave, but in general kids were respectful, and understood what their role was and what mine was. Now," she said, "I feel like they all have remote control changers in their heads, and they're just constantly in motion, not really able to sit there and listen and respond in a way that used to just be taken for granted."

The other thing she said is, "It used to be that we would collaborate. Teachers at a school, teachers in the district, principals, all of the professionals, and we would work toward deciding what it is we would try to achieve. And we would very much rely on our own experience and also research to tell us what would work best." She said, "My last ten years of teaching, I just felt like the school district was prey for any fad that came along. [Inaudible].

I said, "Well, what did you do about that?" She said, "Well, I don't know. Maybe, if I'd been a lot younger, I would have really gotten more involved and fought back. What I really did was just lock my door to keep everybody out. [Inaudible], to keep my head clear to actually teach my students."

Now, I really wanted to repeat that to you because that made a lot of sense to me. The kids to some extent have changed, the environments from which they are coming have changed, the pressure on kids has increased--there's no way that I could even relate to some of the challenges that kids bring, both personally, because of their own situation, but more generally, because of living in the virtual world online. And I also respect her perspective that we've got to figure out how best to teach the kids we have, not the kids we used to have. How best to [inaudible].

Let's take what is working, put it to work in every classroom. I want every school district in America to offer programs in computer science and coding. But in order to do that, we have to set that goal. We have to be able to have a school that is wireable or has wireless to be able to do it. I have a lot of schools in New York that are 80, 100 years old, and that's a hard challenge to me. We have to do more to make sure we've got all of the resources--not just the teaching, but the equipment, and involve experts who should be part of the process.

We know that there will be created more than a million jobs in computer science over the next 10 years. I want young people in New York and across America to be able to compete for those jobs. That starts in our classrooms.

And you know better than any that learning begins at the very start of a child's life. This is a passion of mine. If we don't invest in early child education and universal pre-kindergarten, we are making more jobs harder and we are really [inaudible] a lot of our kids.

We're making some progress now in preschool and universal pre-k. I'm proud that in New York City we now have universal preschool. But this should be spread throughout the state--and it should be in every state. And every child should have the chance to develop his or her talents in those first five years of live. You know, 80 percent of your brain is physically formed by the age of three.

So we need to help preschoolers get pre-literacy and pre-math skills, so they can then be prepared for the work that starts in kindergarten and first, second, and third grade. Right now, in New York, low-income children come to kindergarten nearly a year behind in their language and math skills. That makes it harder to catch up. That's why we need to find programs that work. I started a statewide program back in Arkansas to teach parents how to be their children's first teachers. I convened the first ever White House Conference on Early Childhood Development when I was first lady.

And when I left the State Department, I launched a national campaign called "Too Small to Fail," to try to close the word gap and help children at every income level get a strong start on their language development. So we know that investing in preschool is not only good for individual kids' education, it's good for our economy.

And finally, we can't forget the "C" in TLC--community.

As important as teachers are--as important as the jobs you do happens to be--you need the support of the communities you serve. That comes down to all of us. There's been way too much finger-pointing and scapegoating in public education. And blaming teachers for everything you could imagine.

I believe the real problem is that communities, states, and our country aren't stepping up to work with you, to do everything they can to help every child succeed in school.

So we've made progress here in New York over the past 10 years. Students have improved in reading and math. We still have a ways to go, as you know, to get everybody up to proficiency in these subjects--but we're making progress.

And a big part of the reason why it's so challenging is because more students are living in poverty, more kids are coming from households that are struggling. More kids are facing really difficult situations at home--they're coming to school hungry, or after spending a night in a homeless shelter. They have the weight of the world on their little shoulders. And we need to do better. We can't just turn around and tell you to do better, we need to do better.

I do not believe that more testing will solve homelessness, or poverty, or [inaudible].

So we're going to do this together. We're going to tackle all these problems as one country--one American community. And I will be there with you every step of the way. I told both the AFT and the NEA during their endorsement process that I wanted them at every table where education was discussed.

[Inaudible] the front lines of education, information that I can only get from teachers and educators who are there. A lot of teachers tell me we should go back to the concept of community schools--bring in more non-profit organizations into the schools, make sure we have nurses in the schools, social workers in the schools.

Look, a lot of this is based on income inequality. You're from a well-off family, you get good mental health services, you have the chance to take piano lessons or join a soccer team or be in a play. Those experiences have been stripped out of the budgets of so many schools, and those were often the way where kids find themselves, learning [inaudible].

So we've got a lot to talk about. But I just want to mention, briefly, that there are real differences among those of us who are running. And it's important to really follow it. Lots of folks don't even talk about education. In fact, I'm not even sure, in all the debates we've had, I've been asked one question about public education. I may be wrong about that, but I don't think I have.

And what I want you to focus on--and tell your friends, your neighbors--is that we have a political fight on our hands. There's no doubt in my mind that any of the Republicans would be a disaster for public education.

Ted Cruz says he wants to abolish the Department of Education. Donald Trump says he'd largely eliminate it, but maybe he'd leave some "tentacles out there," whatever that means. They want to slash and burn the public education infrastructure that millions of families rely on. And they not only want to undermine--they want to destroy unions.

I wish I could say that was unusual or unique to them, but that is the current Republican party's priority. That's why they attack teachers at every turn. You've got to remember, before he dropped out, Chris Christie was so proud of the fact that he [inaudible].

What I really, really resent about this is not only that it hurts you and your colleagues--it's that it hurts our kids. That sends a message, going back to my friend's story, that people in positions of power and influence don't respect teachers. So how do we expect kids to respect teachers?

Here's the bottom line--you know it, I know it: Our students deserve better. We've got to invest in our teachers if we're going to give our kids a world-class education.

I am the product of great public schools--and great teachers. I think about them all the time. In first grade, Miss Taylor read us all Winnie the Pooh. In fifth grade, Mrs. Krause taught us about Sputnik, and literally convinced us that President Eisenhower was watching to see if we did math and science. In sixth grade, Miss King drilled us in grammar--she had all of these poems that she used to use to tell us about nouns and verbs. I still remember them.

And in high school, my teachers challenged me. They really pushed me hard. They helped me understand the world I lived in and what I might be able to do to make a difference.

That's what my teachers did, and that's what you do--spark a student's love for learning and change the course of his or her life.

I want all our kids to have those experiences and opportunities--no matter where they live or how they start out.

My little granddaughter will be starting preschool in the not-too-distant future. I hope she loves school like her mom and I did. I want that for every little girl and boy in America. I know you do too.

So, let's be resolved that we're going to change the politics and the attitudes of people in this country--at all levels--towards teaching and towards education. We're going to work for better schools, more resources, more support for educators. I will be the president who helps you get that support. I will make that promise, that [inaudible], we will reconfigure federal spending so that those reflect the promises, made years ago, they intended for.

Title I was to help equalize spending, so that we must lift up the poorest schools and the poorest children. In the 1970s, I worked with the Children's Defense Fund to gather the evidence to make it possible to pass a law that gave kids with disabilities the chance to win the lottery, in their eyes, because they would get to go to school--something they were not able to do before.

But we made a promise--that the federal government would pay 40 percent of special education--the most we've ever paid is 17 percent. Which is one of the reasons why budgets are being cut all the time, and many programs are being [inaudible].

Because--I know you've got work to do tonight, but I love talking to you tonight about all of this--because I am so convinced we're going to make a big difference together. I can't do it without you. I need your help in the NY primary on April 19. If all goes well and I'm the nominee, no matter who the Republicans nominate, I'm really looking forward to debating either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz.

Mr. Trump, tell me again about how you're going to build this wall and make the Mexicans pay for it. Tell me again why you think it's a good idea for Japan and South Korea to develop nuclear weapons. I mean, it's going to be good.

But I want you to just leave with this thought: I will get up every day trying to think about what I can do that day to get every child in this country the chance ... I believe that that's how we'll make sure all of our kids get the chance to make the most of their God-given potential. And I cannot even imagine how I would go about doing that without having you as my partners--without working with you, without supporting you, without making the changes that we know are needed for some "TLC".

So, as I leave you tonight, please know that I am convinced--I am confident--that together we will not only save public education, but we will improve it, and the entire country will have to see it for themselves. Thank you all very much.

Wow. Well, I'll tell you what, it is a thrill to be live at the Apollo. It is wonderful to be back home in New York. It's just extraordinary to stand here and look out at this crowd. Please be seated. We can jump up from time to time. I am sitting here, standing here actually, looking out and seeing so many friends, so many people I've worked with, I've had the privilege of knowing.

It's a special treat to have my former colleague and partner, someone who I hope and expect will not only be the leader of the Democrats in the Senate, if we do our part, he will be the majority leader. We did have eight years working side by side, dealing with the problems and opportunities, and that experience was one of the great honors of my life.

I also want to acknowledge my longtime friend, the person that I actually give credit to for starting me on this journey. That is Congressman Charlie Rangel. I also see the Manhattan borough president, Gale Brewer, and to all the other elected officials, friends, supporters, I love coming to Harlem. This community has made me and my family feel like part of your family, and I'm so grateful for your support and friendship. With your help, we're going to win the primary here on April 19, and then we're going to win the Democratic nomination and the election in November.

Now let me just give you a short summary of where we are. I've competed across our country. I am honored to have received nearly 9 million votes. That is more than a million that Donald Trump has received, and two and a half million more than Senator Sanders. So we're on the right track.

But I don't have to tell you this is a wild election year. I am not taking anything or anyone for granted. We're going work for every vote in every part of this state just like I did when I ran for the Senate. Because New Yorkers took a chance on me, and I will never forget that. You have always had my back and I have always tried to have yours.

When I think back at those eight eventful years that I served you, there were some hard times weren't there? But we pulled together. None of us who lived through 9/11 and its aftermath will ever forget the lives lost, lower Manhattan in ruins, toxic dust and debris raining down, and the many examples of heroism we saw--firefighters and police officers who risked their lives to help save others; the construction workers and emergency personnel and volunteers who spent long hours on the smoldering pile searching for survivors; and then months more clearing the site. All of the New Yorkers who lined up to donate blood, who reached out to families in a million quiet, decent ways. They projected a sense of strength and unity that comforted a whole country. And as the dust settled, New Yorkers rolled up our sleeves and we got to work. Like former fire commissioner Nick Scoppetta, who we lost just last week. He was a great leader during that difficult time. Always a champion for his firefighters, for children and for the city.

New York wanted to rebuild, so Chuck and I fought for federal funding to get it done. And we can see the results now as Lower Manhattan has risen even higher and more magnificently. When first responders and others started suffering adverse health effects from 9/11, a lot of people in Washington didn't want to pay any attention. I kept raising the alarm. I held a hearing that tried to get the attention of the EPA and the Bush administration. They just brushed us off, acting as though it wasn't anything out of the ordinary.

Then I got to work with our congressional delegation to get our first responders and others the health care they needed. It was really important to me. I am so grateful that the Zadroga Act is now ensuring that people who did so much for us, will be taken care of for their entire lives.

But while all this was going on, the Republicans, led by George Bush, started squandering the surplus they'd inherited from my husband's two terms on massive tax cuts for the wealthy. They set a reckless fiscal and regulatory course that eventually tanked our entire economy. Trickle-down economics made life harder for working people here in our state.

So we had to get creative, didn't we? We worked with small businesses to help them use technology to reach new customers; with upstate cities to attract new high-tech research projects to create more good-paying jobs. I even connected chefs and restaurant owners from New York City with farmers and wine makers in the Hudson Valley and Finger Lakes. We were looking for anything that could make more jobs, more markets, more opportunities. And we fought for new investments for poor communities and support for teachers and schools so all of our kids could get a good education no matter what ZIP code they live in. Children in every borough of this city deserve the same chance to succeed as children in Westchester or on Long Island or anywhere else in America.

Because for me, it's really simple. When we invest in our children's education, we invest in our country's future and in a stronger economy for all of us. One of the things I love about New York is New Yorkers have always believed that if you work hard and you do your part, you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead. That is how I saw my job as your senator. My job was to help make that possible for as many people as I could. Boy, did I learn a lot serving the people of this state. Now I am once again asking for your confidence and your vote.

I think the easiest way to describe what my campaign is about--it's about breaking down the barriers that are holding people back from sharing the promise of America. And here's what I will do. Anyone running for president this year faces three big tests. First, can you deliver results that improve people's lives? Second, can you keep us safe? Third, can you bring our country together?

Every candidate should be judged by these tests, because making a real difference for people and families comes first. Americans everywhere are hungry for solutions. We can create more good jobs with rising incomes by investing in manufacturing and small business and infrastructure and clean energy, enough clean energy to power every home in America in 10 years. And here's how I see it: We'll make companies that ship jobs overseas give back the tax breaks they got here at home. If they try to move their headquarters to a foreign country to skip out on their tax bills, we'll slap a new exit tax on them. Then we'll put that money to work in the communities and people left behind.

We can break down barriers holding back parents and families in this economy. Isn't it time for quality, affordable child care, early childhood education, and paid family leave? Isn't it time for raising the minimum wage nationwide? And isn't it time finally to guarantee equal pay for the work women do?

I think we're lucky in New York because these are goals that Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio are fighting for and achieving here, and I will fight for them as president. You know, the Republicans always say, when I talk about this, that I'm playing the gender card. My response is pretty simple: If fighting for equal pay and paid leave is playing the gender card, then deal me in.

Now I also think we can break down the barriers holding back our young people, especially the burden of student debt that makes it so hard for them. Under my plan, you won't have to borrow a dime for tuition at any public college or university. And you'll be able to refinance the debt you already have just like a mortgage or a car loan. That my friends, will save millions of people thousands of dollars.

We can also break down the barriers of systemic racism and discrimination.

We can invest in communities of color, reform our broken criminal justice system, and replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline.

We can reject discrimination against LGBT people like the shameful law passed in North Carolina.

We can defend all our rights--our civil rights and voting rights, workers' rights and women's rights, gay rights, rights for people with disabilities. We're not going to let the Republicans turn us back and rip away the progress we have made.

And that starts by standing with President Obama in demanding that Republican senators do their jobs and vote on his nominee to the Supreme Court.

So, I believe we can break down all these barriers and more if we stand together, if we work together. And for me, it's all about getting results. When I joined with parents and doctors and community leaders to take on the epidemic of children's asthma right here in Harlem, it wasn't about making a point; it was about making a difference. And as your senator and in every job I've ever held, I've worked my heart out to even the odds that have often been stacked against too many people.

Now, some folks may have the luxury to hold out for the perfect, but a lot of Americans are hurting right now and they can't wait for that. They need the good and they need it today.

When we get knocked down like you do in life and in politics, you have to get right back up and keep on working to make people's lives better. And when the insurance industry blocked our push for universal health care for every American, as Chuck said, I partnered with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children's Health Insurance Program. That helped a lot of kids and families here in New York and 8 million children across America.

When any candidate comes before you, that candidate owes it to you to be clear about how we're actually going to deliver. Now my opponent and I share many of the same goals, but some of his ideas for how to get there won't pass, others just won't work because the numbers don't add up. That means, people aren't going to get the help that they need and deserve. And that's what this is supposed to be about.

Now, my opponent says, well, we're just not thinking big enough. Well, this is New York. Nobody dreams bigger than we do, but this--this is a city that likes to get things done, and that's what we want from our president too. We need a president who will help break down all of the barriers holding back Americans, not just some. I take a back seat to no one in taking on income inequality.

I know how important it is to close that gap, to rebuild the middle class, but I'll tell you this: It's also important to take on racial inequality and discrimination in all of its forms.

It's important to stand up to the gun lobby and fight for commonsense gun safety reforms.

I remember that meeting that Chuck was talking about. People were getting cold feet. Folks talk about all the powerful lobbies in Washington, and look, there are a bunch of them. But nothing, no one is more powerful than the gun lobby.

So I understood why some members of Congress are saying, oh my gosh, we can't do this, and some folks in the White House and the administration were getting nervous. But I thought then and I believe now, whatever we can do to save lives, we must do it.

And I remember how hard it was to get the Brady bill passed. My opponent voted against it five times, as I recall. He has sided with the NRA on the important votes of the last 20 years.

And this isn't a single-issue country, so we need a president who can do all parts of the job.

Because the second test is keeping us safe. And at a time when the terrorists are plotting new attacks, and countries like Russia and China and Iran are making aggressive moves, protecting America's national security can't be an afterthought. Our next president has to be just as passionate about defending our people and our country as about fixing our economy.

I will do both, because when you vote here in New York on April 19, you are voting for a president and Commander-in-Chief.

And let's face it, on the Republican side, what we're hearing is truly scary. When Donald Trump talks casually about using torture and allowing more countries to get nuclear weapons, or when Ted Cruz calls for treating American Muslims like criminals and racially profiling predominantly Muslim neighborhoods--that doesn't make them sound strong; it makes them sound in over their heads.

You know, loose cannons tend to misfire, and in a dangerous world that's not a gamble we can afford. But the test that the Republican candidates fails most spectacularly when we get to the third test. Because instead of bringing us together, they seem determined to divide us even further. Their entire campaigns are based on pitting us versus them.

One of my personal heroines, Maya Angelou said--she said a lot that is worth remembering, but she said this: "When someone shows you who they are, believe them."

These Republican candidates are showing us exactly who they are and what they will do as president, and we should believe them. Just listen to Donald Trump, he plays coy with white supremacists. He says demeaning and degrading things about women. He wants to round up millions of Latino immigrants and kick them out of the United States--a nation built by immigrants. He wants to ban all Muslims from entering America--a country founded on religious freedom. It's cynical, it's wrong, and it goes against everything New York and America stand for.

One of the great joys of my time as senator was traveling across this city and this state. New York is home to 20 million people. We don't all look the same, we don't all sound the same or worship the same either. But we pull together. And when a candidate for president says we can solve America's problems by building walls, discriminating against people based on their religion, and turning against each other. Well, New Yorkers know better.

Our diversity is a strength, not a weakness. New York represents the best of America, and together we can face down the worst. Look around you. You'll see a rising generation of young people--more diverse, empowering, and connected than any we have ever seen.

We should build on that spirit, not squash it, and I believe with all my heart that if we reach for more love and kindness, instead of bluster and bigotry, there's nothing we can't do if we put our minds to it.

Let me leave you with one story that says it all. Mohammed Solomon Angani was born in Pakistan and moved to America with his parents when he was 13 months old. They were like any other New York family. Mom was a middle school teacher, dad owned a store.

Mohammed grew up, studied biochemistry at Queens College, got trained as a paramedic, and became a cadet with the NYPD. He wasn't sure what he wanted to do with his life, but he knew he wanted to help. He was just 23 when terrorists flew planes into the World Trade Center. When he heard the news, Mohammed didn't hesitate, he grabbed his medical bag and headed straight to the site.

Like so many others that day, he died trying to save total strangers. But because his body was buried deep under the rubble, neither his family nor the police department knew what had happened to him. For months he was considered missing. Some wondered if this young man with a Muslim name and a background in science could have had anything to do with the attacks. The tabloids piled on.

But once Mohammed's body was found, everyone realized how wrong they had gotten it. He wasn't a suspect. He wasn't a terrorist. He was a hero. So, New York gave Mohammed a hero's funeral with full police honors. Because, as his mother said, this cadet and paramedic ran toward the burning towers when everyone else was running away.

Mohammed was an immigrant, he was a New Yorker, he was an American, and he died trying to help others live. It's up to us to make sure that his and so many others' sacrifice still counts for something. We do that by standing up against bigotry in all forms; by celebrating heroism wherever we find it and by doing our part to serve others and make our communities better and stronger.

That's what countless New Yorkers do every day in a million quiet ways. So we're going to stand up for the values that make New York great and make America great. And don't forget, don't ever forget, this is the greatest country on earth. And we're going to fight for it--fight for our future.

Please join me in this campaign. Go to hillaryclinton.com. Text "join" to 47246. Let's have each other's back, lift each over, and break down all the barriers holding us back from realizing the potential we can have in our county.

Thank you all so much.

Hello, Madison!

Well, thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you and please, please be seated.

I am delighted to be back at this beautiful school, in this wonderful city and to have a chance to talk with all of you. I want to recognize former Governor Doyle. Thank you so much for being here.

Somebody asked me, "So, why are you going to Madison?"

I said, "Why wouldn't I? I love going to Madison. I've been to Madison quite a few times."

"Well, I mean, it's a place where your opponent is very competitive."

I said, "Yeah that's true, but I'm here because, not only do I want to compete for every vote, I respect the people of Madison and Dane County."

I want a chance to talk with you and I want you to know where I am coming from with respect to one of the most important issues facing our country. As someone who's been fighting for progressive causes her whole life. I think it's important that we take a broad view about what's at stake in this election.

I've been making the case in this campaign that we're not a single-issue country. Our next president has to be able to break down all the barriers that are holding us back, not just some of them.

And there are so many challenges we need to take on that don't always get the attention they deserve on the campaign trail.

So today I'm going to talk about one of those challenges--something that matters a great deal to our future, to your future, the future of our country, and that is the Supreme Court.

Stop and think about it--and how many law students are here? Do we have some? Law students are here, so you think about this.

But if you do stop and think this, the court shapes virtually every aspect of life in the United States--from whether you can marry the person you love, to whether you can get healthcare, to whether your classmates can carry guns around this campus.

A lot of Americans are concerned about money in politics, and rightly so. It's a serious problem that we have to address.

But Supreme Court justices are appointed for life. They're not making decisions based on campaign contributions; they're making them based on legal philosophy--and in some cases, ideology.

And for a long time now, the ideological bent of the court has led our country in the wrong direction, especially when it comes to stacking the deck in favor of the already wealthy and powerful.

If we're serious about fighting for progressive causes, we need to focus on the court: who sits on it, how we choose them, and how much we let politics--partisan politics--dominate that process.

And I can't think of a better place for this discussion than right here in Madison, because these decisions will affect you.

Before I was a senator from New York or a secretary of state, and even before I was a wife or mother, for that matter--I was a lawyer.

I was drawn to the law for the same reason a lot of young people are: I put my faith in justice and fairness. And I saw the profound impact that our justice system has on people's lives, for better or for worse. And I wanted to help make it for the better.

So when I was in law school I volunteered for the New Haven legal aid association. After I graduated, I put my legal education to work at the Children's Defense Fund. I ran the legal aid clinic at the University of Arkansas Law School where I taught, supervising students providing legal assistance to prison inmates and poor families.

And when President Carter appointed me to the Legal Services Corporation, which is the largest single provider of civil legal aid in America, it was one of the greatest honors of my life.

And we fought hard to convince Congress that using the law to help poor families was a just and necessary cause. And we won that fight. We hired an army of lawyers to work on behalf of more than a million poor clients across the country--helping families avoid eviction, fight discrimination, receive their earned federal benefits, and so much more.

But I also learned, when the administration changed, and President Carter went out, and President Reagan went in, that you couldn't ever rest in the fight for justice and fairness. And we kept fighting. And thankfully we had increased legal services before that time because it's been pretty much static ever since.

Because of these experiences, I come to the issue of the Supreme Court not just as a former senator who took my constitutional responsibility to "advise and consent" seriously, but also as a lawyer who spent years fighting for people who weren't getting a fair deal in our system.

And I carry all these experiences with me--all those clients and all those cases--every single day.

So today, I want to share some of my thoughts on the Supreme Court, and then I would love to hear from you.

We start with that basic premise that I already stated: The court matters.

At its best, the court is a place where the least powerful voices in our society are heard and protected--whether they be African Americans trying to vote or people getting an education in the era of segregated schools and poll taxes, or women trying to make our own health decisions in the face of humiliating laws that would strip that right away.

Now this may be hard for you today in 2016 to really believe, but I was in high school. The Supreme Court decided a case called Griswold v. Connecticut. That case recognized that women have the right to make the personal choice of whether to use birth control. Before that in some places in our country like Connecticut, it could be a criminal offense.

So that case left a powerful impression on me. Along with all the civil rights cases from the 1950s forward, I saw the court as a place where wrongs were righted, and where everyday folks could stand on equal footing with the most powerful people in the land.

In recent years, the court has made a lot of high-profile decisions--some that uphold this progressive tradition, and some that tarnish it. It effectively declared George W. Bush president. It cut the heart out of the Voting Rights Act. It overturned commonsense laws addressing gun violence, and said that certain employers get to decide whether their female workers can access free birth control under the Affordable Care Act.

But it also made same-sex marriage legal nationwide, preserved the Affordable Care Act--not once, but twice--and ensured equal access to education for women.

The death of Justice Scalia marked the end of an era.

Now as you know, there's a fight over whether President Obama should nominate a replacement, as the Constitution requires. And that fight is revealing the worst of our politics--the same obstructionism that we've seen from Republicans since the beginning of the Obama Administration, the same disregard for the rule of the law that's given rise to the extremist candidacies of Donald Trump and Ted Cruz.

It's corroding our democracy, and it has to stop.

For those of you who aren't following the saga, the story is pretty straightforward: President Obama has done his job and nominated Merrick Garland, one of the most respected judges in the country, to become the ninth justice. Democrats admire him. Republicans do, too. In fact, a few years ago, when another seat was open on the court, Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah--who's not exactly a liberal--said that if the president named Judge Garland, there was "no question" that he'd be confirmed. In fact Senator Hatch called the judge a "consensus nominee."

Now normally, this is when the Senate would do its job--hold hearings, consider the nomination, call for a vote.

But Republicans say they won't. They won't even hold a hearing. It doesn't matter how qualified the president's nominee is, or what the Constitution says, or what our country needs.

This is their job! But they refuse to do it.

Senator Chuck Grassley, the head of the judiciary committee, could hold a hearing tomorrow if he wanted. But he says we should wait for a new president because, and I quote, "the American people shouldn't be denied a voice."

Well, as one of the more than 65 million Americans who voted to re-elect Barack Obama, I'd say my voice is being ignored right now because of their obstructionism.

We chose a president. We chose him twice. And now Republicans in the Senate are acting like our votes didn't count, and that President Obama is not still our nation's leader. And I'll tell you, those are not high-minded principles--they are low-minded politics.

And today, I'm adding my voice to the chorus asking Senator Grassley to step up and do his job. He should hold a hearing--and he should schedule it as soon as the Senate returns from recess.

But let's keep in mind--this battle is bigger than just one empty seat on the court.

By Election Day, two justices will be more than 80 years old--past the court's average retirement age. The next president could end up nominating multiple justices.

That means whoever America elects this fall will help determine the future of the court for decades to come.

Just look at the court's docket, the cases that it's hearing this term alone.

The court is reviewing how public sector unions collect the fees they use to do their work. The economic security of millions of teachers, social workers and first responders is at stake. This is something the people of Wisconsin know all too well, because your governor has repeatedly attacked and bullied public sector unions, and working families have paid the price. I think that's wrong, and it should stop.

The court is reviewing a Texas law imposing unnecessary, expensive requirements on doctors who perform abortions. If that law is allowed to stand, there will only be 10 or so health centers left where women can get safe, legal abortions in the whole state of Texas, a state with about 5.4 million women of reproductive age. So it will effectively end the legal right to choose for millions of women.

The court is also reviewing whether Texas should have to exclude non-voters when drawing its electoral map. That would leave out, among others, legal residents, people with felony convictions and children. The fair representation of everyone in our society--including 75 million children--hangs in the balance.

And on top of all that, the court is reviewing affirmative action and President Obama's executive actions on immigration, which called for halting the deportation of DREAMers and undocumented parents of citizens and legal residents. It's also put a hold on the president's clean-power plan. Either America can limit how much carbon pollution we produce, or we can't. And if we can't, then our ability to work with other nations to meet the threat of climate change under the Paris agreement is greatly diminished.

In short: In a single term, the Supreme Court could demolish pillars of the progressive movement. And as someone who has worked on every single one of these issues for decades, I see this as a make-or-break moment.

If you care about the fairness of elections, the future of unions, racial disparities in universities, the rights of women, or the future of our planet, you should care about who wins the presidency and appoints the next Supreme Court justices.

And consider, if you will, the dangerous turn the court has taken in recent years toward protecting the rights of corporations over those of people.

Now you may have heard of the case Citizens United. The court ruled that corporations have an unfettered right to free speech, just like you and me. That means no limit on what corporations can spend independently to influence elections. And--big surprise--a flood of money from rich people, corporations and special interests has poured into our politics.

Citizens United opened the door to the creation of super PACs and between the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections, spending by outside groups tripled. In 2014, the top 100 donors to super PACs spent nearly as much as all 4.75 million small donors in the country combined.

Now the idea, I believe, that money is speech turns our Constitution upside down. Wealth should not be privileged in the courts--in fact, it should have no privilege. Yet at a time when inequality between working Americans and those at the top is starker than ever, the Supreme Court has given the wealthiest Americans even greater power to affect what happens in our democracy.

Justice Ginsburg says if there were one recent decision she'd overrule, it's this one. I'm with her. And I hope she gets the chance to do just that.

Now people forget this, but the Citizens United case actually began with yet another a right-wing attack on me. It grew out of a Wisconsin case about whether corporations can run issue ads, so-called "issue ads," close to an election. So we all have a personal stake in this.

If the court doesn't overturn Citizens United, I will fight for a constitutional amendment to limit the influence of money in elections. It is dangerous to our country and poisonous to our politics.

But it doesn't stop with Citizens United. This court has voted on the side of corporations--against the interests of workers, unions, consumers and the general public--in case after case.

It's made it harder for consumers to band together to sue a corporation, even if they are collectively suffering from corporate behavior. So 2 million Comcast subscribers in Philadelphia were told they each had to hire a lawyer if they wanted to sue for fairer prices. One-and-a-half million women working at Walmart each had to hire a lawyer if they wanted to sue for sex discrimination. That's a burden that the vast majority of people cannot afford.

I know this might sound a little technical, but it points to an alarming trend.

The court used to--in the 20th century anyway--protect the little guy against the rich and powerful. More and more, it's doing the opposite--protecting the rich and powerful against the little guy.

One study found that between 2009 and 2012, the one party most likely to convince the court to hear a case, out of all the top petitioners, from every part of our society and economy, was the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. So the court was more likely to take up cases concerning corporate interests and then to decide in favor of those corporate interests.

If I'm fortunate enough to be president, I will appoint justices who will make sure the scales of justice are not tipped away from individuals toward corporations and special interests; who will protect the constitutional principles of liberty and equality for all, regardless of race, gender, sexual orientation or political viewpoint; who will protect a woman's right to choose, rather than billionaires' right to buy elections; and who will see the Constitution as a blueprint for progress, not a barrier to it.

So I hope you and everyone across Wisconsin, everyone across America, keeps the court in mind when you vote.

Now, some of you may already have decided to support me, some of you may have decided differently--I will keep working to earn your vote. But even if you are decided or undecided, I will be for you. But I ask you this: Please make sure the court factors into your decision.

Conservatives know exactly how high the stakes are. For years, they have used aggressive legal strategies to accomplish through the courts what they've failed to accomplish through legislation. They couldn't pass a repeal of the Affordable Care Act, so they tried to get the courts to do it. They couldn't stop the president's Clean Power Plan, and they couldn't pass immigration reform, and they didn't want the president to act, so they got the courts to step in.

Now they are fighting hard to make sure the Supreme Court includes as many right-wing justices as possible.

As scary as it might be, ask yourselves: What kind of justice will a President Trump appoint? Or for that matter, what kind of attorney general? What kind of lower court judges?

And as you know, he believes Muslims should be banned from entering this country because of their faith. What would that mean for a nation founded on religious freedom?

He wants to round up 11 million immigrants and kick them out. What would that mean for a nation built by immigrants?

He says wages for working people are too high and we shouldn't raise the minimum wage. What would that mean for working people, and a court that's already tilting in favor of powerful corporations?

Let's be clear about what's really going on here. The current fight over Judge Garland is just the latest in a long line of actions aimed at disrupting our government and undermining our president. And the result is an America that's more divided, more dysfunctional, and less secure.

Consider how Republicans, led by Ted Cruz, shut down the entire federal government in 2013, rather than fund the Affordable Care Act. Or how they almost shut down the government again last fall over trying to defund Planned Parenthood.

Remember what Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the Senate, said back in 2010--that the single most important priority for Republicans was making Barack Obama a one-term president. Now some people thought that was hyperbole. But I always remember Maya Angelou's advice: "When someone shows you who they are, believe them." Right?

And today, Republican leaders have been showing us who they are, in fact, for a long time. Blocking Judge Garland is just the latest evidence and we should start believing them.

If you want to know where that kind of obstruction and recklessness leads, just look at the Republican race for the presidency.

Now every day, another Republican bemoans the rise of Donald Trump. They say a Trump nomination will set their party back decades. I agree. It will set the Republican Party back if Donald Trump is their standard-bearer.

But Donald Trump didn't come out of nowhere. What the Republicans have sown with their extremist tactics, they are now reaping with Donald Trump's candidacy.

It wasn't long after Senator McConnell said his number-one goal was to prevent the president's reelection that Donald Trump started his racist campaign to discredit the president's citizenship--remember the birther movement? And Ted Cruz embarked on his strategy of holding the government hostage to get his way.

These things are connected.

When you have leaders willing to bring the whole of government to a halt to make headlines, you may just give rise to candidates who promise to do even more radical and dangerous things--because once you make the extreme normal, you open the door to even worse.

And when you have a party dead-set on demonizing the president, you may just end up with a candidate who says the president never legally was the president at all.

Enough is enough. It's time for us to take a stand--and you can start right here in Wisconsin.

Your senator, Ron Johnson, is bragging about blocking the president. He's in a tight race against former Senator Russ Feingold, an exceptional public servant. During his time on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Senator Feingold actually helped build a stronger judiciary.

So when you leave here, I urge you to call the office of Senator Johnson, email him, contact him--if he has a Facebook page, go on and express your opinion. Tell him to stop playing games with the Supreme Court.

And remember this, remember this in November, when you choose who stands for you in the Senate: The incumbent will vote for corporations and against working people. His opponent will vote for a court that will listen to you.

Then keep these larger issues in mind when you go to the polls on April 5.

It's time to get back to what makes America already great--respect for the rule of law, statesmanship over showmanship, and people working together across party lines for the good of the nation.

That's what this court fight is really about. That's what this election is about--whether we, as a country, are able to come together to meet the challenges we face and break down all the barriers holding people back; or whether we will be paralyzed by deadlock and divided from each other by bitter partisanship.

At our best, America has united behind the ideal that everyone deserves a fair shot, no matter who we are or where we started out. And at its best, the Supreme Court has defended that ideal.

Like in 1954, when the court abolished segregation in our schools.

Or 1973, when it ruled that women have the right to make intimate health decisions for ourselves.

Or 1977, when the court paved the way for public sector unions.

Or 1982, when it ruled that undocumented children had the right to go to school.

Or just last year, when the court ruled that marriage equality was the law of the land.

You know, all Jim Obergefell wanted was to marry his partner of more than 20 years, John Arthur, before John Arthur died of ALS. They ended up flying to Maryland, because their home state of Ohio didn't recognize same-sex marriage. John was so sick, he couldn't even leave the plane--but they got married right there on the tarmac in Baltimore, then flew straight home.

And when John died three months later, Ohio listed him as single on his death certificate. For the partner who had loved and cared for him, this was a bitter, painful blow, a rejection of the life they had built together over decades--until the Supreme Court ruled that Jim and John's marriage was legal everywhere in the United States of America.

And in that decision, Justice Kennedy wrote, "The nature of injustice is that we may not always see it in our own times. The generations that wrote and ratified the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment did not presume to know the extent of freedom in all its dimensions. So they entrusted to future generations a charge protecting the right of all persons to enjoy liberty as we learn its meaning."

That decision is the latest reminder of what the court can do when it stand for equality, or against it. When it can make America a fairer place, or roll back the progress we've worked so hard to achieve.

It depends on what the court decides, and it depends on who's deciding.

Which, in the end, means it depends on all of us.

So think hard about the court. For years people have tried to make the court a voting issues, and it's not easy to do.

People are rightly concerned about their economic well-being, about the education of their children, about their health care, about their social security payment. About all the other issues that keep people up at night around millions of kitchen tables.

But this election has ripped away the curtain and made it absolutely clear to everyone how essential the Supreme Court is to those decisions as well. I will keep talking about it, and advocating, and calling on the Senate to do its job, and I hope there will be a great chorus of voices across our land that will do the same.

It's our Constitution, it's our court, and it's our future.

Thank you all very much.

Thank you. Thank you very much, Mike, thank you for the introduction, but--more than that--for your service to our country, and our partnership during the four years I served as secretary of state. What happens in Vladivostok stays in Vladivostok.

I am delighted to be back here at Stanford. And I will never forget the day that we first brought Chelsea here. I brought her to visit when she was thinking about schools, but I knew as soon as she saw Stanford that this is where, if she were fortunate enough to be admitted, she would certainly choose to come. And, of course, I remember when Bill and I brought her here to begin her freshman year, and then the dinner for parents that Mike was referring to. So it's a great treat to be back.

And now that my daughter is a mother herself--you can imagine--there's already talk, at least among one or two members of our family, since her husband is also an alum of Stanford, about how good Charlotte would look one day in Cardinal red.

I am delighted to be here with some very distinguished guests. Secretary Shultz, Secretary Perry, thank you both for being here with us. Lanny, thank you. Marcos, thank you, and others. It's really a great treat for me to be not only at the university, but at this particular institute as well. You have really made Stanford a center for national security scholarship, and that is the principle reason why I am here today.

Yesterday's attack in Brussels was the latest brutal reminder that our fight against ISIS and radical jihadist terrorism is far from finished.

More than 30 innocent people are dead--men and women, hurrying to catch a plane, or waiting for a train, or meeting a loved one. Hundreds more are wounded, including three Mormon missionaries from Utah; a U.S. Air Force officer, his wife and four children; and other Americans.

It's understandable that Americans here at home are worried. The threat we face from terrorism is real, it's urgent, and it knows no boundaries. Even as Brussels grieves, the memories of Paris and San Bernardino are painfully fresh as well. On Saturday, a bombing in Istanbul killed four people, including two U.S.-Israeli dual citizens. Many other places have been targeted by terrorists in the past year alone. Hotels in West Africa. Beaches in Tunisia. A market in Lebanon. A Russian passenger jet in the Sinai.

ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities. It beheads civilians. It enslaves, tortures, and rapes women and girls.

Walls will not protect us from this threat. We cannot contain ISIS--we must defeat ISIS.

This will be one of the most important challenges facing the next president, who takes office on January 20. Our new commander in chief will walk into the Oval Office and find a world of hard choices and complex problems. That president will sit down at that desk and start making decisions that will affect the lives--and livelihoods--of every American, and people around the world.

So, the stakes could not be higher.

Today, I want to emphasize three points.

First, we face an adversary that is constantly adapting and operating across multiple theaters, so our response must be just as nimble and far-reaching.

Second, to defeat this transnational threat, we need to reinforce the alliances that have been core pillars of American power for decades.

And third, we need to rely on what actually works--not bluster that alienates our partners and doesn't make us any safer.

Let's begin by being clear about what we are facing: ISIS controls a shrinking but still sizeable territory in Iraq and Syria. It leads a far-flung network that includes affiliates across the Middle East and North Africa, and cells in Europe, Asia, and even here in North America. It's also part of a broader ideological movement that includes other terrorist groups.

We need to do battle on all these fronts.

Last year, in speeches in New York and Minneapolis, I laid out a three-part plan to defeat ISIS in the Middle East, around the world, and here at home. Recent events have only reinforced the urgency of this mission.

First, we do have to take out ISIS' stronghold in Iraq and Syria.

We should intensify the coalition air campaign against its fighters, leaders, and infrastructure; step up support for local Arab and Kurdish forces on the ground and coalition efforts to protect civilians; and pursue a diplomatic strategy aimed at achieving political resolutions to Syria's civil war and Iraq's sectarian divide.

Second, we must dismantle the global network of terror that supplies money, arms, propaganda, and fighters. This means targeted efforts to deal with ISIS affiliates, from Libya to Afghanistan. It means going after the key enablers who facilitate illicit financial transactions and help jihadists arrange travel, forge documents, and evade detection. And it means waging online battles with extremists to discredit their ideology, expose their lies, and counter their appeals to potential recruits in the West and around the world.

Third, we must harden our defenses and build our resilience here at home. We need to counter each step in the process that can lead to an attack, deterring would-be terrorists and discovering and disrupting plots before they're carried out.

Our enemies are constantly adapting, so we have to do the same. For example, Brussels demonstrated, clearly, we need to take a harder look at security protocols at airports and other sensitive so-called "soft sites," especially areas outside guarded perimeters.

To do all this, we need an intelligence surge--and so do our allies.

We also have to stay ahead of the curve technologically. That does mean working with the brightest minds here in Silicon Valley to more effectively track and analyze ISIS's social media posts and map jihadist networks online. When other candidates talk about building walls around America, I want to ask them: How high does the wall have to be to keep the internet out?

And we also have to tackle a thorny challenge that is top-of-mind here in the Bay Area: navigating the security and civil liberties concerns surrounding the encryption of mobile devices and communications.

Impenetrable encryption provides significant cybersecurity advantages, but may also make it harder for law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals to investigate plots and prevent future attacks. ISIS knows this, too. At the same time, there are legitimate worries about privacy, network security, and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors--including terrorists--can exploit.

There may be no quick or magic fix. In the Apple case, the FBI may have found a work-around--but there will be future cases, with different facts and different challenges. So the tech community and the government have to stop seeing each other as adversaries and start working together to protect our safety and our privacy. A National Commission on Encryption, like Senator Mark Warner and Congressman Mike McCaul are proposing, could help. And our security professionals could use the advice and talents of technology professionals to help us figure out how we do stay ahead of the terrorists.

Our fight against radical jihadist terrorists will be long, and there is very real risk of future attacks here at home. But pursuing this comprehensive strategy will put us in the best position to defeat ISIS and keep our families and communities safe.

This is a very personal issue for me, having served as a Senator from New York on 9/11. Having seen the horrors that were produced by a well-planned and executed attack on our country. Knowing how important it is that we do stay ahead of those who wish to do us great harm, without panic, without paranoia--but with resolve not to give in to the very behavior the terrorists are hoping to engender.

We can't let fear stop us from doing what's necessary to keep us safe--nor can we let it push us into reckless actions that end up making us less safe.

For example, it would be a serious mistake to stumble into another costly ground war in the Middle East. If we've learned anything from Iraq and Afghanistan, it's that people and nations have to secure their own communities. We can--I argue, must--support them, but we can't substitute for them.

It would also be a serious mistake to begin "carpet bombing" populated areas "into oblivion." Proposing that doesn't make you sound tough--it makes you sound like you're in over your head.

Slogans aren't a strategy. Loose cannons tend to misfire. What America needs is strong, smart, steady leadership to wage and win this struggle.

To do that, we need to strengthen America's alliances in Europe, Asia, and around the world. And that is the second point I want to emphasize.

On 9/11, NATO treated an attack against one as an attack against all. On September 12, headlines across Europe, most notably in Le Monde, proclaimed, "We are all Americans." There were very few planes in the air that day--but one was a British jet carrying the UK's top national security leaders to Washington to offer any help they could.

Now it's our turn to stand with Europe. We cherish the same values and face the same adversaries--so we must share the same determination.

This is especially true at a time when Europe faces multiple overlapping crises--from President Putin's aggression in Ukraine, to the massive influx of refugees, to continuing economic challenges, to the rise of right-wing nationalist parties. We have made so much progress together toward the goal of a Europe that is free, whole, and at peace--and we can't risk letting it fall apart now.

For decades, Republican and Democratic administrations have understood that America's alliances make us stronger. Secretary Shultz compared the slow, steady work of building diplomatic relationships to gardening. He knew that when you cultivate effective partners, you can harvest real rewards.

Allies extend our reach, share intelligence, provide troops in conflicts like Afghanistan, offer bases and staging areas around the world for our military, and serve as a bulwark against competitors like Russia and China. And, by the way, both Moscow and Beijing know our global network of alliances is a significant strategic advantage they can't match.

NATO, in particular, is one of the best investments America has ever made. From the Balkans to Afghanistan and beyond, NATO allies have fought alongside the United States, sharing the burdens and the sacrifices. In the 1990s, Secretary Perry helped guide NATO's expansion based on the alliance's core tenets of collective defense, democracy, consensus, and cooperative security. They became known as the "Perry Principles," and they're still at the heart of what makes NATO the most successful alliance in history.

Turning our back on our alliances--or turning our alliance into a protection racket--would reverse decades of bipartisan American leadership and send a dangerous signal to friend and foe alike.

Putin already hopes to divide Europe. If Mr. Trump gets his way, it'll be like Christmas in the Kremlin. It will make America less safe--and the world more dangerous.

When it comes to the struggle against ISIS, we need our allies as much as ever. We need them to be strong and engaged, for they are increasingly on the front lines. London, Paris, Madrid, Brussels, Istanbul--they've all been hit by terrorism. And, as we saw when a terrorist cell in Hamburg carried out the 9/11 attacks: What happens in Europe has a way of making it to America. So it's essential that we have strong partners who can work with us to disrupt plots and dismantle networks in their own countries before they lead to attacks in ours.

America needs European intelligence services working hand-in-hand with our own, including where they may have better reach and expertise, like in North Africa. We need European banks to stop terrorist financing. We need European planes flying missions over Iraq and Syria, and European special forces helping train and equip local anti-ISIS forces on the ground.

We need European diplomats and development experts working to improve governance and reduce the appeal of extremism across the wide arc of instability that stretches from West Africa all the way to Asia; together, we can do more. And, more urgently, to support moderate voices and stand with Tunisians, Libyans, Kurds, and others in the region who are trying to do the right thing.

And as we should, of course, be closely consulting with Israel--our strongest ally in the Middle East--we also have to extend our consultations to Arab partners as well.

All of this will make America safer, and help defeat ISIS.

There is much we can do to support our European partners: helping them improve intelligence and law enforcement, facilitating information sharing, working more closely at every level. There's also more they can do to share the burden with us. We'd like to see more European countries investing in defense and security, following the example Germany and others have set during the Obama administration.

The most urgent task is stopping the flow of foreign fighters to and from the Middle East. Thousands of young recruits have flocked to Syria from France, Germany, Belgium, and the United Kingdom. Their European passports make it easier for them to cross borders and eventually return home, radicalized and battle-hardened. We need to know the identities of every fighter who makes that trip and start revoking passports and visas.

Stemming this tide will require much better coordination among every country along the way. Right now, many European nations don't even alert each other when they turn away a suspected jihadist at the border, or when a passport is stolen. And Turkey, a NATO ally, still has more work to do to control the border where most foreign fighters cross into Syria.

After the Paris attack, France and Belgium pledged to move forward together on reforms--but that's difficult without the European Union. In January, the EU announced a new, integrated counterterrorism center, but intelligence cooperation still lags, and the EU keeps delaying a vote to share traveler information between member states. It's actually easier for the United States to get flight manifests from EU nations than it is for EU nations to get them from their own neighbors, thanks to an agreement the U.S. negotiated when I was secretary of state.

There also has to be a special emphasis on identifying and investing in the hot spots--the specific neighborhoods, prisons, and schools where recruitment happens in clusters, as we've seen in Brussels. And it's time to make good on the promise of establishing a new unified European Border and Coast Guard to strengthen the continent's external borders, which are under unprecedented pressure from refugees and migrants.

Now, this is a heartbreaking crisis.

Last year, the world was horrified by the photo of a drowned toddler lying on a Turkish beach. In the months since then, hundreds more children have died trying to reach safety. We've seen Europe and Syria's neighbors in the Middle East struggle under the weight of this challenge. It's too big for any one country--or even continent--to handle alone. I'm glad that the EU and Turkey are now working closely together--and the United States should do whatever we can to support that.

The only truly effective answer is to go to the source: End the conflict that is displacing all these people. So we have to support and maintain the ceasefire in Syria. And we should also work with our coalition partners and opposition forces on the ground to create safe areas where Syrians can remain in the country rather than fleeing toward Europe.

In the meantime, it would be wrong to shut our doors to orphans or to apply religious tests for people fleeing persecution. That's not who we are.

But of course we have to be vigilant in screening and vetting everyone. We can't allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and humanitarian obligations--but we also have to be smart and vigilant about how we process people into our country. It would be doubly cruel if ISIS can not only force families from their homes, and but also prevent them from ever finding new ones.

And that brings me to my third point: In our fight against radical jihadism, we have to do what actually works.

One thing we know that does not work is offensive, inflammatory rhetoric that demonizes all Muslims.

There are millions of peace-loving Muslims living, working, raising families, and paying taxes in this country. These Americans are a crucial line of defense against terrorism. They are the most likely to recognize the warning signs of radicalization before it's too late, and the best positioned to block it.

Last year in Minneapolis, I met parents, teachers, imams, and others in the Somali-American community who are working with law enforcement and mental health professionals to intervene with young people at risk of being radicalized. Efforts like that deserve more local and national support.

Since 9/11, law enforcement has worked hard to build trustful and strong relationships with American Muslim communities. As the director of the FBI told Congress: Anything that erodes that trust makes their job more difficult.

We need every American community invested in this fight, not fearful and sitting on the sidelines.

So when Republican candidates like Ted Cruz call for treating American Muslims like criminals, and for racially profiling predominantly-Muslim neighborhoods, it's wrong. It's counterproductive. It's dangerous.

As a spokesman for the New York Police Department pointed out last night, that kind of blanket bigotry would treat the city's nearly 1,000 Muslim police officers as threats. "It's hard to imagine a more incendiary, foolish statement," he said.

Commissioner Bill Bratton of the NYPD was even more blunt this morning: He said Senator Cruz "doesn't know what the hell he's talking about."

Demonizing Muslims also alienates partners and undermines moderates we need around the world in the fight against ISIS.

There's been a lot of talk from both Republicans and Democrats about the importance of building coalitions with Muslim nations. Having actually done this, I can tell you: Insulting allies and partners is not a good way to start.

Another thing we know that does not work--based on lots of empirical evidence--is torture.

Many intelligence, military and law enforcement experts have attested to this fact. It also puts our own troops--and, increasingly, our own civilians--at greater risk.

I'm proud to have been a part of the administration that banned torture, after too many years in which we had lost our way.

And if I'm president, the United States will not condone or practice torture anywhere in the world.

Even when we're up against opponents who don't respect human life or human rights, torture is not the right choice. As Senator John McCain has said: The high standard to which we hold ourselves "isn't about our enemies; it's about us. It's about who we were, who we are and who we aspire to be."

America is a great nation. And this is a time for American leadership. Smart, strong, steady leadership.

No other country can rally allies and partners to defeat ISIS and win the generational struggle against radical jihadist terrorism. Only the United States can mobilize common action on a global scale in defense of our people and our values.

America doesn't cower in fear or hide behind walls. We lead--and we succeed.

Throughout our history, we have stared into the face of evil and refused to blink--whether it was fascism, the Cold War, or hunting down Osama bin Laden. And we will defeat ISIS, too. No enemy or adversary should ever underestimate the determination of the American people.

I will never forget what it was like to arrive in Brussels for the first time as secretary of state, in March of 2009.

I was on my way to NATO. NATO headquarters was buzzing. Hundreds of young people at the European Parliament had stood and cheered--not for me, but for the idea of American leadership; for the promise of an alliance that delivered unprecedented peace and prosperity on both sides of the Atlantic.

That's what we need to remember today. Americans cannot--and I believe will not--turn on each other, turn on our allies, or turn away from our principles.

We're in it for the long haul. And that means we're going to work together. And we're going to prevail.

This may be another one of the long struggles we have confronted from time to time in our history, but--like all the rest of those--if we can forge a bipartisan consensus, if we can bring our people to understand what this struggle means to us, if we can maintain our alliances and our partnerships, we will be successful.

And that will benefit not only our country, but the world.

And that, when you boil it down, is what American leadership has to be about.

Thank you.

Thank you so much. It is wonderful to be here and see so many friends. I've spoken at a lot of AIPAC conferences in the past, but this has to be one of the biggest yet. And there are so many young people here--thousands of college students from hundreds of campuses across the country. I think we should all give them a hand for being here and beginning their commitment to this important cause! You will keep the U.S.-Israel relationship going strong.

As a senator from New York and secretary of state, I've had the privilege of working closely with AIPAC members to strengthen and deepen America's ties with Israel. Now we may not have always agreed on every detail, but we've always shared an unwavering, unshakeable commitment to our alliance and to Israel's future as a secure and democratic homeland for the Jewish people.

And your support helped us expand security and intelligence cooperation, develop the Iron Dome missile defense system, build a global coalition to impose the toughest sanctions in history on Iran, and much more.

Since my first visit to Israel nearly 30 years ago, I have returned many times and made many friends. I've worked with and learned from some of Israel's great leaders--although I don't think Yitzhak Rabin ever forgave me for banishing him to the White House balcony when he wanted to smoke.

Now I'm here as a candidate for president and I know that all of you understand what's at stake in this election. Our next president will walk into the Oval Office next January and immediately face a world of both perils we must meet with strength and skill, and opportunities we must seize and build on.

The next President will sit down at that desk and start making decisions that will affect both the lives and livelihoods of every American, and the security of our friends around the world. So we have to get this right.

As AIPAC members, you understand that while the turmoil of the Middle East presents enormous challenge and complexity, walking away is not an option. Candidates for president who think the United States can outsource Middle East security to dictators or that America no longer has vital national interests at stake in the region are dangerously wrong. It would be a serious mistake for the United States to abandon our responsibilities or cede the mantle of leadership for global peace and security to anyone else.

As we gather here, three evolving threats--Iran's continued aggression, a rising tide of extremism across a wide arc of instability, and the growing effort to delegitimize Israel on the world stage--are converging to make the U.S.-Israel alliance more indispensable than ever.

We have to combat all these trends with even more intense security and diplomatic cooperation. The United States and Israel must be closer than ever, stronger than ever and more determined than ever to prevail against our shared adversaries and advance our shared values.

This is especially true at a time when Israel faces brutal terrorist stabbings, shootings, and vehicle attacks at home. Parents worry about letting their children walk down the street. Families live in fear. Just a few weeks ago, a young American veteran and West Point graduate named Taylor Force was murdered by a Palestinian terrorist near the Jaffa port. These attacks must end immediately and--

Palestinian leaders need to stop inciting violence, stop celebrating terrorists as martyrs and stop paying rewards to their families!

Because we understand the threats Israel faces. We know we can never take for granted the strength of our alliance or the success of our efforts. Today, Americans and Israelis face momentous choices that will help determine the future of our relationship and of both our nations.

The first choice is this: Are we prepared to take the U.S.-Israel alliance to the next level?

This relationship has always been stronger and deeper than the headlines might lead you to believe. Our work together to develop the Iron Dome saved many Israeli lives when Hamas rockets began to fly. I saw its effectiveness first-hand in 2012 when I worked with Prime Minister Netanyahu to negotiate a ceasefire in Gaza.

And if I'm fortunate enough to be elected President, the United States will reaffirm we have a strong and enduring national interest in Israel's security.

And we will never allow Israel's adversaries to think a wedge can be driven between us. When we have differences, as any friends do, we will work to resolve them quickly and respectfully.

We will also be clear that the United States has an enduring interest in and commitment to a more peaceful, more stable, more secure Middle East. And we will step up our efforts to achieve that outcome.

Indeed, at a time of unprecedented chaos and conflict in the region, America -- America needs an Israel strong enough to deter and defend against its enemies, strong enough to work with us to tackle shared challenges and strong enough to take bold steps in the pursuit of peace.

That's why I believe we must take our alliance to the next level. I hope a new 10-year defense memorandum of understanding is concluded as soon as possible to meet Israel's security needs far into the future--

That will also send a clear message to Israel's enemies that the United States and Israel stand together, united

It's also why, as President, I will make a firm commitment to ensure Israel maintains its qualitative military edge.

The United States should provide Israel with the most sophisticated defense technology so it can deter and stop any threat. That includes bolstering Israeli missile defenses with new systems like the Arrow 3 and David's Sling. And we should work together to develop better tunnel detection technology to prevent arms smuggling, kidnapping, and terrorist attacks.

One of the first things I'll do in office is invite the Israeli Prime Minster to visit the White House--

And I will send a delegation from the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs to Israel for early consultations.

Let's also expand our collaboration beyond security. Together we can build an even more vibrant culture of innovation that tightens the links between Silicon Valley and Israeli tech companies and entrepreneurs. There is much Americans can learn from Israel, from cyber security to energy security to water security -- and just on an everyday people-to-people level. And it's especially important to continue fostering relationships between American and Israeli young people who may not always remember our shared past. They are the future of our relationship and we have to do more to promote that.

Many of the young people here today are on the front lines of the battle to oppose the alarming "Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions" movement, or BDS. Particularly at a time when anti-Semitism is on the rise across the world--especially in Europe--we must repudiate all efforts to malign, isolate, and undermine Israel and the Jewish people.

I've been sounding the alarm for a while now. As I wrote last year in a letter to the heads of major Jewish American organizations, we have to be united in fighting back against BDS. Many of its proponents have demonized Israeli scientists and intellectuals, even students. To all the college students who may have encountered this on campus, I hope you stay strong. Keep speaking out. Don't let anyone silence you, bully you, or try to shut down debate, especially in places of learning like colleges and universities.

Anti-Semitism has no place in any civilized society, not in America, not in Europe, not anywhere.

All of this work--defending Israel's legitimacy on the world stage, expanding security and economic ties, taking our alliance to the next level -- depends on electing a President with a deep, personal commitment to Israel's future as a secure, democratic, Jewish state -- and to America's responsibilities as a global leader.

Tonight, you'll hear from candidates with very different visions of American leadership in the region and around the world. You'll get a glimpse of a potential U.S. foreign policy that would insult our allies, not engage them, and embolden our adversaries, not defeat them. For the security of Israel and the world, we need America to remain a respected global leader committed to defending and advancing the international order--an America able to block efforts to isolate or attack Israel. The alternative is unthinkable.

Yes, we need steady hands, not a President who says he's neutral on Monday, pro-Israel on Tuesday, and who-knows-what on Wednesday because everything's negotiable. Well my friends, Israel's security is non-negotiable.

I've sat in Israeli hospital rooms, holding the hands of men and women whose bodies and lives were torn apart by terrorist bombs. I've listened to doctors describe the shrapnel left in a leg, an arm, or even a head. That's why I feel so strongly that America can't ever be neutral when it comes to Israel's security or survival. We can't be neutral when rockets rain down on residential neighborhoods, when civilians are stabbed in the street, when suicide bombers target the innocent. Some things aren't negotiable--and anyone who doesn't understand that has no business being our president.

The second choice we face is whether we will have the strength and commitment to confront the adversaries that threaten us --especially Iran.

For many years, we've all been rightly focused on the existential danger of Iran acquiring a nuclear weapon. After all, this remains an extremist regime that threatens to annihilate Israel. That's why I led the diplomacy to impose crippling sanctions and force Iran to the negotiating table, and why I ultimately supported the agreement that has put a lid on its nuclear program. Today, Iran's enriched uranium is all but gone, thousands of centrifuges have stopped spinning, Iran's potential break-out time has increased, and new verification measures are in place to help us deter and detect any cheating. The United States, Israel, and the world are safer as a result.

But still, as I laid out in a speech at the Brookings Institution last year, it's not good enough to trust and verify. Our approach must be distrust and verify. This deal must come with vigorous enforcement, strong monitoring, clear consequences for any violations, and a broader strategy to confront Iran's aggression across the region.

We cannot forget that Tehran's fingerprints are on nearly every conflict across the Middle East, from Syria to Lebanon to Yemen. The Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps and its proxies are attempting to establish a position on the Golan from which to threaten Israel, and they continue to fund Palestinian terrorists. In Lebanon, Hezbollah is amassing an arsenal of increasingly sophisticated rockets and artillery that well may be able to hit every city in Israel.

Tonight you will hear a lot of over-heated rhetoric from the other candidates about Iran, but there's a big difference between talking about holding Tehran accountable and actually doing it.

Our next President has to be able to hold together our global coalition and impose real consequences for even the smallest violations of this agreement. We must maintain the legal and diplomatic architecture to turn all the sanctions back on if needed.

If I'm elected, the leaders of Iran will have no doubt that if we see any indication that they are violating their commitments not to seek, develop, or acquire nuclear weapons, the United States will act to stop it--and that we will do so with force, if necessary.

Iranian provocations like the recent ballistic missile tests also are unacceptable and should be answered firmly and quickly, including with more sanctions. Those missiles were stamped with words declaring that, quote, "Israel should be wiped from the pages of history." We know they could reach Israel or hit the tens of thousands of American troops stationed in the Middle East. This is a serious danger and it demands a serious response.

The United States must also continue to enforce existing sanctions -- and impose additional sanctions as needed -- on Iran and the Revolutionary Guard for their sponsorship of terrorism, illegal arms transfers, human rights violations, and other illicit behaviors like cyber attacks. We should continue to demand the safe return of Robert Levinson and all American citizens unjustly held in Iranian prisons.

And we should work closely with Israel and other partners to cut off the flow of money and arms from Iran to Hezbollah. If the Arab League can designate all of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization, surely it's time for our friends in Europe and the rest of the international community to do so as well and to do that now.

At the same time, America should always stand with those voices inside Iran calling for more openness. We know the Supreme Leader still calls the shots and that the hard-liners are intent on keeping their grip on power. But the Iranian people themselves deserve a better future -- and they are trying to make their voices heard. They should know that America is not their enemy. They should know we will support their efforts to bring positive change to Iran.

Of course Iran is not the only threat we and Israel face. The United States and Israel also have to stand together against the threat from ISIS and other radical jihadists. An ISIS affiliate in the Sinai is reportedly stepping up attempts to make inroads in Gaza and partner with Hamas. On Saturday, a number of Israelis and other foreigners were injured or killed in a bombing in Istanbul that may well be linked to ISIS. Two of the dead are U.S.-Israeli dual nationals. This is a threat that knows no borders. That's why I've laid out a plan to take the fight to ISIS from the air, on the ground with local forces, and online, where they recruit and inspire. Our goal cannot be to contain ISIS -- we must defeat ISIS.

Here is a third choice: Will we keep working toward a negotiated peace or lose forever the goal of two states for two peoples? Despite many setbacks, I remain convinced that peace with security is possible -- and that it is the only way to guarantee Israel's long-term survival as a strong Jewish and democratic state.

It may be hard to imagine progress in this current climate, when many Israelis doubt that a willing and capable partner for peace even exists. But inaction cannot an option. Israelis deserve a secure homeland for the Jewish people. Palestinians should be able to govern themselves in their own state, in peace and dignity. Only a negotiated two-state agreement can provide those outcomes.

If we look at the broader regional context, converging interests between Israel and key Arab states could make it possible to promote progress on the Israeli-Palestinian issue. Israelis and Palestinians could contribute to greater cooperation between Israel and Arabs. I know how hard all of this is. I remember what it took just to convene Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas for the three sessions of direct face-to-face peace talks in 2010 that I presided over. But Israelis and Palestinians cannot give up on the hope of peace. That will only make it harder later. All of us need to look for opportunities to create the conditions for progress, including by taking positive actions that can rebuild trust -- like the recent constructive meetings between the Israeli and Palestinian Finance Ministers aiming to help bolster the Palestinian economy, or the daily on-the-ground security cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. But at the same time, all of us must condemn actions that set back the cause of peace. Terrorism should never be encouraged or celebrated. And children should not be taught to hate in schools--that poisons the future.

Everyone has to do their part by avoiding damaging actions, including with respect to settlements. America has an important role to play in supporting peace efforts, and as President I would continue the pursuit of peace of direct negotiations. And let me be clear: I would vigorously oppose any attempt by outside parties to impose a solution, including by the UN Security Council.

There is one more choice that we face together, and in some ways, it may be the most important of all: Will we, as Americans and as Israelis, stay true to the shared democratic values that have always been at the heart of our relationship? We are both nations built by immigrants and exiles seeking to live and worship in freedom--nations built on principles of equality, tolerance, and pluralism. At our best, both Israel and America are seen as "a light unto the nations" because of those values.

We are both nations built by immigrants and exiles seeking to live and worship in freedom -- nations built on principles of equality, tolerance, and pluralism. At our best, both Israel and America are seen as "a light unto the nations" because of those values.

This is the real foundation of our alliance. And I think it's why so many Americans feel such a deep emotional connection with Israel. I know I do. And it's why we can not be neutral about Israel and Israel's future.

Because in Israel's story we see our own. And the story of all people who struggle for freedom and self-determination. There are so many examples. You know we look at the Pride Parade in Tel Aviv -- one of the biggest and most prominent in the world.

And we marvel that such a bastion of liberty exists in a region so plagued by intolerance. We see the vigorous -- even raucous -- debate in Israeli politics and feel right at home. And of course some of us remember a woman, Golda Meir, leading Israel's government decades ago and wonder what's taking us so long here in America.

But we cannot rest on what previous generations have accomplished. Every generation has to renew our values and yes, even fight for them. Today Americans and Israelis face currents of intolerance and extremism that threaten the moral foundations of our societies.

Now in a democracy, we're going to have differences. But what Americans are hearing on the campaign trail this year is something else entirely. Encouraging violence. Playing coy with white supremacists. Calling for 12 million immigrants to be rounded up and deported. Demanding we turn away refugees because of their religion and proposing a ban on all Muslims entering the United States.

Playing coy with white supremacists, calling for 12 million immigrants to be rounded up and deported. Demanding we turn away refugees because of their religion and proposing a band on all Muslims entering the United States. Now, we've had dark chapters in our history before.

We remember the nearly 1,000 Jews about the St. Louis who were denied entry in 1939 and sent back to Europe. But America should be better than this. And I believe it's our responsibility as citizens to say so.

If you see bigotry oppose it. If you see violence condemn it. If you see a bully, stand up to him. On Wednesday evening Jews around the world will celebrate the festival of Purim. And children will learn the story of Esther, who refused to stay silent in the face of evil. It wasn't easy, she had a good life, and by speaking out she risked everything.

But as Mordechai reminded her, we all have the obligation to do our part when danger gathers. And those of us with power or influence have a special responsibility to do what's right.

As Elie Wiesel said when accepting the Nobel Peace Prize, "Neutrality helps the oppressor, never the victim. Silence encourages the tormentor, never the tormented." So my friends, let us never be neutral or silent in the face of bigotry.

Together let us defend the shared values that already make America and Israel great. Let us do the hard work necessary to keep building our friendship and reach out to the next generation of Americans and Israelis so the bounds between our nations grow even deeper and stronger. We are stronger together and if we face the future side-by-side, I know for both Israel and America, our best days are still ahead.

Thanks you, so much.

Hello. Thank you all so much. Wow, I'll tell you what, I am thrilled to be here and I want to thank Congressman Butterfield for that enthusiastic introduction, but more than that, for his leadership in the Congress where he chairs the very important Congressional Black Caucus. Thank you so much. I want to thank Bill Bell, your mayor; Larry Hall, the House leader; Christie Moore from the public schools, all of whom appeared before I came out, and I'm grateful that they did. Dr. Bert Lum, thank you for being superintendent. And Dr. William Logan, thank you for being principal of Hillside. I want to thank Congressman David Price and his wife Lisa who are here. And all the elected officials--all of the state, county, and local officials. ...

I want to also thank some great friends--Carolina and Richard Sullivan and Tom and Jill Hendrickson, and I particularly want to thank the Hillside High School choir, band, and dance ensemble. It's a real pleasure for me to be back in North Carolina to be here today. I want to follow up where the congressman stopped. I'm running for president to knock down every barrier that stands in your way to get ahead and stay ahead. I am not a one-issue candidate, because this is not a one-issue country. We have work to do. We need more good jobs with rising incomes for hardworking Americans. That's why I'm proposing more jobs with infrastructure, manufacturing, and let's combat climate change with more clean, renewable energy jobs. And yes, let's invest in more research right here in the Research Triangle. You know what that can mean.

And I want to do more for small business. The fastest-growing segment of small business are minority and women-owned small businesses. And let's raise the minimum wage so that barrier gets knocked down so people who work full-time aren't left in poverty. And what do you say we finally, finally guarantee equal pay for women's work?

One of the barriers some people still face has to do with health care. I am very proud of President Obama's success in establishing the Affordable Care Act. And I will fight every attempt by the Republicans to hand our health care back to insurance companies. I will also work to make the costs lower, the expenses lower, and I will take on the pharmaceutical drug industry's increasing prices that are posing a great burden to all kinds of Americans, especially older Americans on Medicare.

Now, it's important that we recognize we are now at 90 percent coverage. We have never been this high, my friends. And when the Republicans talk about repealing it, they never tell you what they would replace it with, because they don't want you to know. They would turn the clock back so that you could be denied health insurance if you have a preexisting condition. They would make women once again pay more for our health care than men. And there's no guarantee that people up to the age of 26 would be able to stay on their parents' policies, because that only happened due to the Affordable Care Act.

So we have a lot at stake. And I also believe we should not start over. We should not in any way throw our country into a contentious debate about health care again. So I will defend the Affordable Care Act.

But here in this high school, this historic high school, I want to talk about another barrier--the barrier of education. Education should be the great door-opener, and yet we know it often doesn't turn out that way. I think every child in this country deserves a good teacher in a good school--regardless of the ZIP code you live in. And I see my friend Kay Hagan here. I was proud to serve with her in the United States Senate. And she told the truth when she ran for reelection. She said these policies that the Republicans are pushing in North Carolina are going to undermine public education in this state. And it's only gotten worse in recent years.

And I want to say something. I spent 18 wonderful years in Arkansas. My husband was governor; he asked me to chair a commission to try to improve education in our state because we were 49th, Mississippi was 50th. We had a lot of schools that were really under-resourced. Facilities were terrible. Kids did not get a chance to even know how far they could go. And you know what we did? We looked at North Carolina. We looked at what was happening in public education in this state. Because back in the "70s and the "80s and the early "90s, North Carolina was committed to improving its public schools. And for the life of me, I don't know why the Republicans have such a problem with funding public schools to the extent that they should.

Because I recently looked at the numbers. Teachers' salaries have been slashed in North Carolina. You are now 46th in the nation in funding for public education. Thousands of teachers who literally cannot make ends meet are leaving the profession. So what was in many ways an incredible success story that people looked at and wanted to emulate, we watched your Republican governor and legislature slowly eroding the base for public education in this state. And I will tell you this. Public education remains the foundation of our democracy, and we are going to fight for it.

I know you can't get good jobs with rising incomes unless you've got a good public education system. So when I talk about wanting to get the economy moving, create more opportunities, it goes hand in hand with education. So let me tell you what I want to do.

If I am so fortunate to be your president, I want to be a good partner with teachers and principals and school boards and families and students. And as a mother and a grandmother, I have an idea about what we need to do for public education. You see, I think public education needs some TLC. Teaching, learning and community. And here's what I propose. I want to lead a national effort to recruit more young people and even mid-career people back into teaching by working to raise the salaries and the professionalism and the standing of our teachers. Whenever you look at international rankings and you see countries like Finland or Singapore standing really tall in these international rankings, when you really look behind the numbers, what you find is this: teachers are treated with respect as the professionals that they are, playing the role they play in preparing our next generation.

So I want more good teachers. I want to help work with colleges of education and other ways of training teachers to create a teaching force second to none in the world. And we are going to work hard to push states to reinvest in public schools, including in our teachers.

And what's the "L'? The "L' is for learning. Let's make clear we want to do what works. I know that there are lots of theories about how best to teach kids, and different kids often need different kinds of help. But we ought to look at the research about what works. And we ought to be also providing opportunities for every student in every school. So for example, every school district should offer computer science programs and coding programs for their students. There will be more than a million jobs in computer science in the next 10 years. I want the young people from everywhere, including Hillside, to be prepared to compete for those jobs. I also want to go and get the best programs we can find anywhere -- in public schools, in good charter schools that are part of public school systems. Let's find the best programs. Let's make sure we're doing what works.

And then finally, when we think about learning, let's start with early childhood education. And the community has a big role to play. There's been a lot of finger-pointing and scapegoating in public education, when really, you know what the problems are? The problems are that communities are not stepping up and helping every child succeed. If you have children who are living in poverty, if you have children who are coming from families where there is disruption, whether it be addiction or a mental illness or imprisonment, those kids need more help. I want communities to provide more support for our students and our teachers. We should get back to the idea of community schools. Schools are public treasures, and we should look for ways that schools can incorporate, the way they used to, health, counseling, as well as a curriculum that is much broader than what is now available. You should not have to go to a wealthy school in a wealthy suburb to get art and music and theater and the other kinds of learning and teaching that will help kids.

I feel passionately about this because I am a product of really good public schools. I had great teachers from kindergarten through high school. They challenged me. They helped me understand the world I lived in and what I could do to make a difference. And we had everything. I can't tell you, I was so fortunate -- music and art. Those were just part of the curriculum. I was a terrible singer even though I loved to sing. In fact, probably the worst moment in my terrible singing career was after singing to my daughter every night before I put her to bed; about the age of 18 months she had learned to say a few words and I was singing away, rocking her, and she reaches up and puts her little finger on my mouth and says, "No sing, mommy, no sing." But before my daughter told me that, our music teacher told me that.

We need to create those memories and those opportunities for our kids today. And I will be absolutely committed to doing everything I can imagine to help school districts like this one, and also really poor school districts. Within the last two weeks, I've been in schools in South Carolina, rural South Carolina, that were literally falling apart. And I've been in Detroit where the schools are in such bad condition, children are in classrooms with mold and rodents. I used to have a test. I called it the Chelsea test, after my daughter. I would go to public schools in Arkansas, or when my husband started running for president all across the country, and I would say to myself: would I send my daughter there? A lot of places the answer was yes, and proud to do it. Too many times the answer was no.

There should not be a single public school in our country where any person wouldn't want to send their child. And that is the way we should think about it. And if you are in a position of public responsibility, look in the mirror and ask yourself: would you send your child or your grandchild to these schools? And if the answer is no, do something about it--improve conditions in the facilities and the curriculum.

Now, there is a lot at stake in this election. The stakes keep getting higher and the rhetoric on the Republican side keeps getting lower. That's why it's really important, as the congressman said, that you vote early or you vote on Tuesday. I would be honored to earn your support because I believe North Carolina needs a president who will work with those who are interested in creating the future that North Carolina should have for all of your citizens.

So I know it's really hot, and for some of us being this hot is like a sauna and you feel like maybe you're going to lose a pound or two. But for others, it may be a little too hot. So let me just end with this.

There's a lot I want to do. I want to stand up for voting rights against the kind of restriction that North Carolina is imposing. It is outrageous that in 2016, we have to say we're for voting rights. I thought that was settled decades ago. But one of the ways to make sure that we stop this is to do everything you can to turn out as many people as possible, to demonstrate we are not going to be intimidated by these restrictive rules that are being imposed unfairly, and I would argue unconstitutionally.

And yes, I will take on the gun lobby. 33,000 people a year die from gun violence. There are ways we can do this. Everything I've proposed--comprehensive background checks and the like--are supported by 92 percent of the American people and 85 percent of gun owners. Folks talk all the time about the powerful interests in Washington, and they list them off: Wall Street and drug companies and insurance companies and big oil. Absolutely, they all have too much say. But you know what the strongest lobby is? It's the gun lobby, which intimidates people, threatens elected officials. It is time, my friends, we stand together and say enough, we're going to save lives, we're going to protect our communities and our families.

I stand with the families of Sandy Hook. Think of how you would feel. You send off your precious first-grader, maybe with a little backpack on his or her back, and the next think you hear is that some crazed person has taken an AR-15 and murdered those precious children and some of their teachers. The families of Sandy Hook are suing the maker of the AR-15. And they are trying to prevent other families from ever experiencing what they have gone through. But here's the problem. A law was passed a few years ago immunizing the gun companies and sellers from liability. I voted against it; my opponent voted for it. There is not another industry in America that has that kind of free pass--no accountability. Cars kill people; they can be sued. Drugs, prescription drugs do. Toys even do. Families can hold somebody accountable and try to change practices. Under this law, suits like this one have been thrown out. I hope that the parents of Sandy Hook have better luck, but I will tell you this: I will do everything I can to make sure gun makers and sellers are accountable, just like any other business in our country.

So my friends, I am thrilled to be back in this beautiful state. I can't believe the way spring has already come. Of course that does remind us we do have to take climate change seriously, which I intend to do. But the weather should be beautiful, so don't waste any time. Vote before early voting closes. Vote on March 15. If you will go and vote for me on Tuesday, I will work and fight for you as hard as I can. Thank you all very much.

hank you. Wow. I am so excited to be here. And I appreciate the short tour that I just had and the information that I was given. I want to thank Detroit Manufacturing Services for welcoming us here today, and I want to thank them especially for giving so many hardworking people the chance to make a good living with a good job with benefits and union representation. It all adds up.

I want to thank Andra Rush, the CEO of DMS. I want to acknowledge this is the largest woman-owned business in Michigan and one of the largest Native American-owned businesses in America. It's also great to be here with so many of my friends, my former colleagues. I'm thrilled to be in Detroit. I want to thank the mayor. Where is the mayor? Mayor. Thank you, Mayor Duggan, for everything you're doing. I want to thank Senator Debbie Stabenow, my friend and colleague Congressman John Conyers he's got that red jacket on, you can see him. Congresswoman Brenda Lawrence, thank you. My long-time friend, Congresswoman Debbie Dingell.

And of course, I want to recognize a legend. Now you may think I'm talking about his storied career in the Congress, and of course I am. But I want you to know that former Congressman John Dingell is a social media sensation. He is the king of Twitter. And I'm so pleased he's here today. I want to hank former Governor Jim Blanchard and Janet Blanchard. And we have some great union leaders here. We have the former president of the UAW, Bob King. Thank you, Bob, for being here. We have the president of SCIU here in the state, Marge Robinson. And the president of AFSCME, Council 25, Al Garrett, thank you all for being with me.

Now, I deliberately chose to come to Detroit and to come to this company to talk about jobs. Because I want more people to see what's happening in southwest Detroit and Midtown and Eastern Market. New businesses are opening, families are moving in, the street lights are on again, the buses are running, there is a palpable feeling of pride and community. And we have to spread the economic revitalization to all of Detroit's neighborhoods. And you can do it, because look how far you've come. Thanks to your hard work, the auto industry just had its best year ever.

Innovation is on the rise. Between the car makers and suppliers, the clean energy sector, the defense corridor, high tech firms in Ann Arbor, cutting edge design happening in Grand Rapids, the next generation of engineers getting trained up in Houghton and so much else, your hard work, doing what you've always done, making and designing things that America needs and the world wants is once again going strong, and I am so grateful to everybody who played a part in that.

Now last night, Detroit played a different role, didn't it? Hosting the Republican presidential--I don't know what to call it, I guess debate. There were so many insults flying back and forth, it was hard to keep track. But the biggest insult of all was to the American people. The economy, which should be at the top of any list that anybody running for president has was basically an afterthought. Maybe that's because all the Republican candidates support the same failed policies: cut taxes for the rich, get out of the way of corporations, don't raise the minimum wage -- in fact, the frontrunner says he thinks wages are too high in our country--and slash government to the bone. Now surprise they've all criticized or opposed the auto rescue. What was missing last night is an honest reckoning with the most important economic challenge we face. How do we raise incomes and create the good jobs of the future?

Now on the Democratic side, we agree on a number of things. But I don't think we can answer that question by refighting battles from 20 years ago. Anyone running for president owes it to you to come up with real ideas, not an ideology, not an old set of talking points, but a credible strategy designed for the world we live in now. And that's exactly what I'm here today to do.

In America, if you work hard and you do your part, you're supposed to be able to get ahead and stay ahead no matter who you are or where you started out. That's the basic bargain that made this country great. But for many Americans, that no longer holds true. Too many barriers hold back our families, our economy, and because of that, our country. Instead of good paying jobs, millions of Americans are stuck in low-wage work. Now corporate profits and CEO pay keeps rising, but paychecks for working families have barely budged. And instead of affordable college, we have skyrocketing tuition and millions of people weighed down by student debt.

More women than ever are the main breadwinners or co-breadwinners, but they still don't get equal pay. And the unions that helped build our country and the middle class are under concerted attack. And it's no surprise that Americans are angry, is it? Folks work hard all day, then lie awake all night trying to figure out how in the world they're going to pay for their kids' college, or a new roof, or making sure mom gets the care she needs. And for some parents, it's even worse. They have to worry about whether the water their kids drink is poisonous, like the families in Flint. Or about their kids' schools that are crumbling and rodent-infested, like too many here in Detroit. That is not the way it is supposed to be in America.

Now, some of the blame for these changes in the economy rest with big, historic forces, like trade and technology. Wall Street and some of our corporations also, however, bear a lot of responsibility. Too many in the financial industry forgot that the purpose of banking is to get capital to main street to invest in new businesses or expand successful ones like this of any size, and to increase the opportunity for home ownership and community development.

It is not to create huge riches for a select few at the expense of everyone else. And meanwhile, too many leaders in corporate America are prioritizing their short-term stock price over their workers and their communities. And we can't forget the damage caused by trickle-down economics and right-wing ideologues who believe in weakening government oversight, massive tax cuts for the rich, ripping away the safety net, and breaking the backs of unions.

But as Detroit proves every day, what has been broken can be rebuilt, stronger than before.

Throughout this campaign, I've said that creating good-paying jobs and raising incomes is the defining economic challenge of our time, and that in order to get where I want us to go, we need growth that is strong, fair, and long-term. That's why we need a new bargain for the new economy. A new bargain to ensure that the jobs of the future are good-paying American jobs. The kind that provide both good incomes and the dignity, pride and sense of purpose that come when you have something to look forward to when you get up in the morning. And the people that I met as I was walking here with Ed were all people who fit that description, proud of what they're doing, grateful for the opportunity to be part of a team that respects one another, looking to continue the growth that this company has enjoyed. So that's the kind of jobs we want, and you're creating them again in Michigan.

Some of the most exciting technological breakthroughs are happening right here -- not in China, not in Germany, but in Michigan. You used to make B-24 bombers at Willow Run. Now you're developing driverless cars there. At Ventower in Monroe, you're making the towers that make wind turbines possible. Chevy is making electric cars in Hamtramck and using clean energy to do it. Shinola has created more than 500 jobs, and they've cornered the market on watches for presidents. Both my husband and President Obama love their Shinolas.

So Michigan proves every day that American workers are the best in the world. All they need is a fair chance on a fair playing field. That's why we need this new bargain, and here's what it should be.

First, corporations have to do right by their communities and our country. Corporations benefit in so many ways from being right here in the United States. But too often, this relationship feels like a one-way street. Too many are not holding up their end of the bargain. They don't recognize that one of the biggest assets on their balance sheet in America. And part of the problem is a casino culture on Wall Street that for too long puts short-term speculation ahead of long-term strength, and asks taxpayers to hold the bag when they bets go bad. We need to make sure Wall Street never threatens Main Street again. And as I have said may times, no bank can be too big to fail and no executive too powerful to jail.

But we also have to understand how bad behavior on Wall Street and pressure to meet quarterly earnings expectations contributes to bad behavior across corporate America. Look at companies like Nabisco, laying off 600 workers in Chicago and moving their production line to Mexico, even though the company has long received tax breaks from the state of Illinois. They have no problem taking taxpayer dollars with one hand and giving out pink slips with the other. Look at the growing number of companies moving their headquarters overseas just so they can avoid paying their fair share of taxes here at home.

Now, one company doing that right now is called Johnson Controls, which makes car parts. It actually lobbied for and benefitted from the auto rescue in 2008. They went to Washington, along with everybody else, and they asked for help. The Republicans said, "No. We're not going to help." President Obama and the Democrats said, "Yes. We will help. Millions of jobs and families are at stake." So everybody here, all of us taxpayers, we helped save Johnson Controls. And on their website, they talk about their contracts with the federal government. And they say that keeping the country safe and prosperous is, and I quote, "The patriotic thing to do." Well, I hope they do the patriotic thing and stay in America and pay the taxes that they owe for everything we've done for them.

Now, look. I'm not interested in condemning whole categories of businesses or the entire private sector. Of course not. But I do want to send a clear message to every board room and executive suite. If you cheat your employees, you exploit your customers, you pollute our environment or rip off the taxpayers, we will hold you accountable. This country has given you so much. If you desert America, you'll pay a price. But do the right thing, invest in your workers and your country's future, and we will stand with you. And here's how it should work.

To discourage bad behavior, we'll make companies pay for what are called inversions under the tax code, which means they pretend to sell themselves to a company overseas. And then they pretend to move their headquarters overseas. I call it a perversion, but under the tax code it's called an inversion. And we will make you pay for that with a new exit tax. And if a company like Nabisco outsources and ships jobs overseas, we'll make you give back the tax breaks you received here in America. If you aren't going to invest in us, why should taxpayers invest in you?

Let's take that money and put it to work in the communities that are being left behind. And to encourage good behavior, let's enact policies that promote long-term investment, like capital gains taxes that only scale downward for truly multi-year investments but are higher for short-term trading. Let's promote in-shoring, innovation, and investment with new tax credits that make it profitable to take the high road rather than the low, like Michigan Ladder Company, which has been operating in Ypsilanti for over a century. They have stopped buying fiberglass ladders from suppliers in China and started making them here in Michigan. I know it would make more financial sense, and we've got to help other companies discover what they can do as well.

Now, I'm not asking corporations to be charitable, although that's important. I'm asking corporations to realize that when Americans prosper, they prosper, too. The idea of corporate patriotism might sound quaint in an era of vast multinationals, but it's the right thing to do and, I argue, the smart thing to do as well.

And that leads directly to the second part of the new bargain. Companies have to start treating workers like assets to be investing in, not costs to be cut. Look at what's happening. These days, our biggest companies return eight or nine out of every ten dollars they earn directly back to shareholders, either in the form of dividends or stock buybacks. And they're also, many of them, sitting on huge cash reserves, often stashed in foreign tax havens. That's money they're not using to train their workers or give them a raise.

Even worse, the link between rising productivity and rising pay has snapped. Productivity goes up still. Profits go up. Executive pay goes up. Stock prices go up. But workers are being left behind. And in an economy that's 70 percent consumption, that's a big problem. And it doesn't have to be that way. In the 1990s, when we had another Democratic President that I think did a good job, in the 1990s, when productivity rose, the typical family's income also rose by $10,000. Some of you remember that. And in fact, African American family income went up as a higher percentage because there were so many jobs and people really making progress. It's good for everyone when workers' incomes go up. America grows when your paycheck grows.

This is like fundamental Economics 101. More money in the hands of wealthy people just helps wealthy people. More money in the hands of working people helps everyone, including businesses. And that's why we should raise the federal minimum wage and fight for even higher minimum wages in places where that makes sense. It's why we should provide incentives for companies that invest in high quality training for employees, which can lead to higher-paying jobs. And we should create a tax credit for employers that share profits with their workers. Auto makers here in Detroit know the value of transparent profit-sharing plans that come on top of good wages.

Now, we also have to take on a big reason why paychecks haven't moved and good jobs are still too scarce, and that is the diminishing power of labor unions. As you know well, unions helped bring back the auto industry. No one gave more to Detroit and Michigan during these past few years. Union members build our cities, keep our lights on, educate our children, and care for our loved ones. And the relentless assault on labor and the erosion of workers' bargaining power has not only affected worker pay, it's also a key reason why overtime rules haven't been updated in decades and why family-friendly policies like paid leave, earned sick days, and fair scheduling haven't been widely embraced.

And inequality, inequality has been widened by the decline of unions, too. We need to stand up to Republicans in Washington and in state houses like here in Michigan who do everything they can to reduce unions' power. And we need to stand up for workers because when unions are strong, families are strong and America is strong.

The third part of the new bargain is government stepping up, too. Too often Washington only works for the wealthy and the well-connected. You know it. I know it. Everyone knows it. Like what Republicans in Congress did when they cut off unemployment benefits for people laid off in the Great Recession who were still working, looking for work or when candidates promise trillions of dollars in tax cuts that go mostly to the rich. This needs to change. American interests have to come before special interests. And the American worker and American jobs have to come first. And one area where we've gotten this balance wrong over the years is trade.

The good news is America's exports are up 40 percent under President Obama. I was proud to work with him on that when I was secretary of state. Because export jobs tend to pay better than non-export jobs, so there are real benefits there.

But looking back over the past decades as globalization picked up steam, there's no doubt that the benefits of trade have not been as widely enjoyed as many predicted, especially when the Bush Administration failed to enforce our trade laws or stand up to China. Corporations may have won, but many workers lost. They lost their jobs, they lost their sense of purpose. Cheaper goods are no substitute for that. So America has to do better.

There are people in both parties who think we can somehow shut ourselves off from the world. But even if the United States never signs another trade deal, globalization isn't going away. Our challenge is to establish and enforce fair rules so that our workers compete on a level playing field and countries don't race to the bottom on labor, the environment and so much else.

The way we enforce trade rules right now is completely backward. We've put the burden of initiating trade cases on workers and unions. And we don't take action until after the damage is done, which often means after workers is laid off. That is ridiculous. The government should be enforcing the law from the beginning so workers can focus on doing their jobs.

And enforcing trade laws means dealing with one country above all, China. Now when it comes to trade, China is, by far, the worst rule breaker in the world. It dumps cheap products in our markets, subsidizes state-owned enterprises who undersell in the global market to hurt our companies, and it discriminates against American companies. But now that China's economy is slowing down, we can expect even more bad acts from them. It will look to dump products overseas to make up for lost demand at home. So we have to stop that right now, and we have to prevent not just China but other countries from manipulating their currencies to gain an unfair price advantage.

So I will do this. I will expand the ways we respond to currency manipulation to include effective new remedies like duties and tariffs. Now I know something about dealing with China. I've sat across a lot of tables from Chinese leaders, discussing and negotiating, even arguing about some of the toughest issues we face: nuclear weapons, cyberwarfare, human rights, currency, climate change and much more. So I know firsthand that the relationship between our countries is the most complex and consequential in the world. And the next president is going to need the judgment and experience to steer that relationship in the right direction on trade and everything else.

When it comes to trade deals, here's my standard: I won't support any agreement unless it helps create good jobs and higher wages for American workers and protects our national security. I need to be able to look into the eyes of any hardworking American anywhere in our country and say this deal will help raise your income. That's why I voted against the last big, multinational trade deal called CAFTA. It's why I don't support the Transpacific Partnership trade deal.

But our policies--can't just be about stopping trade abuses and outsourcing; they also have to be about creating jobs and higher wages here at home. And I agree with my esteemed opponent, Senator Sanders. We need major new investments in infrastructure, and I put forth a $275 billion plan that would put millions of Americans to work modernizing our roads and bridges and railways and ports, finish the job of connecting all of our homes to high-speed internet.

And we will also rebuild our crumbling water systems in Flint and around the country. I also want to create a national infrastructure bank to put private capital to work alongside taxpayer dollars. We have so much work to be done in this country, we need everybody contributing.

And I also have a vision for a clean energy future. The longer we wait to deal with climate change, the more expensive it gets. But if we start today, we can create good paying jobs that can't be outsourced. We can become the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. And we can protect our kids' health and futures in the bargain. So far, so good, but that's not enough. We need to invest in dynamic sources of growth, like small businesses, manufacturing, and technology. And I'm the only candidate on either side in this race who has actually put forward a plan to support entrepreneurs and remove the barriers that stand in their way.

You see the power of small businesses right here in Michigan, with companies like Detroit Bikes and McClure's Pickles. They create jobs; they make the city a more dynamic, attractive place. But the sad truth is more dreams die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else in America. People come with a good idea, and they get turned away. So we have to increase access to startup capital, give more help to community banks, so more entrepreneurs can get their dreams off the ground and compete for your business.

And one important tool to support both small and big business is the Export-Import Bank, which helps businesses reach new markets and compete for new customers. Now, unfortunately, Republicans in Congress, along with Senator Sanders, have tried to kill it repeatedly. He also stood with Republicans against another important job-creating tool, the New Market Tax Credit, which has helped steer investments into neglected communities. Now that doesn't make sense to me. We should never let ideology get in the way of helping Americans find the good jobs they need and deserve.

So I think your next president has to offer a serious proposal to jumpstart manufacturing. With the right policies and investments, we can ensure America continues to have the world's most competitive auto and auto parts industries. Now this is not a new fight for me. In the Senate, where I represented New York, I also represented some great manufacturing towns like Rochester and Buffalo. I worked closely with likeminded senators, like Debbie Stabenow. We reached across the aisle to start the bipartisan Manufacturing Caucus. This is a priority for me, to help our manufacturers use all the latest science to forge stronger steel and weave tougher fabrics and make thinner, stronger glass, like they do at Corning Glass in upstate New York.

Now I remember how hard I had to work to protect jobs in Corning against China. We had to battle the Chinese over intellectual property and fair competition. We had to battle the Bush administration to actually go to bat for a blue chip American company. But it was worth it, because good American jobs were at stake. So companies like Corning show how technology can transform our economy for the better. That creates entirely new industries, and it's a powerful force for prosperity and improved quality of life.

The next 20 years are poised to be even more transformative than the last. I think it's exciting, and you can see that all over Michigan, in Ann Arbor and other places. But you can't have a candid conversation about the jobs of the future without also talking about the challenges posed by technology automation and mechanization. We've got to harness technology as a force for good for all of us.

And as we lay the foundation for a brighter future, we have to deal with the legacy of the past. There are still too many economic barriers that disproportionately hold back communities of color--redlining in housing, segregation in schools, a huge opportunity gap. We need a comprehensive commitment to invest in all communities, anywhere they have, that have too long been neglected.

And let's work to replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline. And let's help the millions of people coming home from prison every year find new jobs, not closed doors. I want to work across our country, not only in urban communities, but in coal country, in Indian country. I want to do everything I can to help immigrants who are forced to live in the shadows.

But here's the bottom line -- creating good paying jobs has got to be a top priority. We've got to build on the progress we've made under President Obama, over 70 straight months of private sector job creation, and as we learned this morning, more than 240,000 jobs just last month. But you know what? I'm not taking that for granted. We've got to make sure we have much more in the pipeline, so that every American has a chance to get ahead and stay ahead.

And don't let anyone tell you we can't do this. As I said, in the '90s, we made incomes rise for everyone. We've seen the auto industry pull together and recover from the brink of collapse to record sales. We've done this before. And I'll tell you, when I hear people running for president who spend all their time badmouthing America, it really upsets me. You know what? We've got work to do. Instead of complaining, let's join hands. Let's lift ourselves up. Let's get going together. Let's make a difference.

Let's build tomorrow. Let's make sure every American has the same chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. Thank you all so much.